Values are presented as number only or median (range). 
The authors have nothing to disclose. 
In spite of the morphological and developmental differences between vertebrate and invertebrate eyes, their basic function to translate light information from the environment to the brain is maintained. In Drosophila, the adult compound eye has been studied in great detail. It consists of ∼800 individual ommatidia. Each ommatidium contains eight photoreceptor cells (PRs): six outer PRs (R1-R6) and two inner PRs (R7 and R8) . Different PRs are sensitive to different wavelengths of light, depending on the rhodopsin gene (rh) they express. Outer PRs are involved in motion detection and contain Rh1, a broad-spectrum photopigment. R7 and R8 each expresses a distinct rh with restricted absorption spectra-rh3, rh4, rh5, and rh6. The type of rh expressed in inner PRs defines two major types of ommatidia: The pale (p) ommatidia have R7 that contain UV-sensitive Rh3 with the corresponding R8 expressing blue Rh5, whereas in yellow (y) ommatidia, R7 expresses UV-sensitive Rh4 and R8 expresses green Rh6.
Recently, substantial progress has been achieved in understanding the molecular basis of how different subtypes of PRs are specified (Wernet and Desplan 2004; Mikeladze-Dvali et al. 2005a ). Initially, R7 and R8 express the transcription factor spalt (sal) that is required to specify them as inner PRs and distinguish them from outer PR identity (Mollereau et al. 2001) . Then, the expression in R7 of the gene prospero (pros), which encodes a homeodomain transcription factor, further distinguishes R7 from R8 by repressing R8 rhs, rh5, and rh6 .
The generation of the two types of ommatidia, yellow and pale, includes several steps. First, the stochastic expression of the transcription factor Spineless (Ss) in a subset of R7 cells specifies yellow ommatidia. Ss is required cell autonomously in yR7 for rh4 expression and, further, cell nonautonomously for the underlying R8 cell to acquire y fate and turn on rh6 expression (Wernet et al. 2006) . The coordination between R7 and R8 rhodopsins requires a signal from pR7 that induces the pR8 fate. In sevenless mutants that lack R7, rh5 expression is lost while rh6 is expanded to almost all R8 (Papatsenko et al. 1997; Chou et al. 1999) . The y versus p choice in R8 is then reinforced by a bistable loop of regulation between the tumor suppressor gene warts (wts) and the growth regulator melted (melt) (Mikeladze-Dvali et al. 2005b) : wts is required for rh6 expression, whereas melt is essential for rh5 expression. wts and melt repress each other transcriptionally, thereby ensuring that a robust decision to express either rh5 or rh6 is made. The ho-meoprotein encoded by orthodenticle (otd) is required in both p R7 and R8 to activate rh3 and rh5 through direct binding to their promoter. Otd has only a permissive role: It is expressed in all PRs and its overexpression is not able to induce rh3 or rh5 expression in y ommatidia. Furthermore, the y ommatidial fate does not expand in otd mutants (Tahayato et al. 2003) .
Although much is known about the development of the adult visual system, little is known about the development and function of the larval visual system. PRs of the larval eye (Bolwig Organ [BO] ) extend their axonal projections to the larval pacemaker neurons, which control the larval circadian rhythm (Malpel et al. 2002; Hassan et al. 2005; Moncalvo and Campos 2005) . Visual input via the larval eye is crucial for the entrainment of the molecular clock (Malpel et al. 2004; Mazzoni et al. 2005) . Furthermore, both larval PRs and pacemaker neurons control larval photophobic behavior (Mazzoni et al. 2005) . Very simple in structure, the larval eye contains ∼12-14 PRs (Green et al. 1993) . In contrast to adult ommatidia, BO lacks accessory cells, such as pigment cells or cone cells.
BO precursor cells develop in the optic placode adjacent to the optic lobe primordium (Green et al. 1993 ). Development of larval PR precursor cells proceeds in a two-step process. First, primary precursors (also called BO founder cells) are specified; they express and require the proneural gene atonal (ato) and the retinal patterning genes sine oculis (so) and eyes absent (eya) as well as hedgehog (hh) signaling (Schmucker et al. 1994; Suzuki and Saigo 2000) . Then, primary precursors signal to the surrounding tissue by expressing the TGF␣ homolog spitz (spi), which activates EGF receptor (EGFR) and recruits adjacent cells to develop as secondary precursors (Daniel et al. 1999; Suzuki and Saigo 2000) . tailless (tll), which encodes an orphan nuclear receptor, opposes EGFR signaling in the surrounding optic lobe primordium, preventing adjacent cells from developing as PRs (Daniel et al. 1999) . Subsequently, as immature PRs detach from the optic lobe primordium and start to differentiate, they extend their axons and remain in contact with the optic lobe (Schmucker et al. 1992 (Schmucker et al. , 1997 Dumstrei et al. 2002) . Two distinct PR subtypes can be distinguished in the larval eye: Four PRs contain blue-sensitive Rh5 while eight contain green-sensitive Rh6. This is strongly reminiscent of adult R8 PRs, which express Rh5 in 30% of ommatidia and Rh6 in the remaining 70%. Thus, similar molecular mechanisms could act to specify the two distinct subtypes in larval PRs and in adult R8 cells.
Here we describe the genetic mechanisms underlying the specification of the two larval PR subtypes. We show that primary precursors develop independently of EGFR and give rise to the Rh5 subtype whereas secondary precursors give rise to Rh6-subtype PRs. EGFR signaling is required for the survival of secondary precursors of the Rh6 subtype. The combinatorial action of transcription factors Seven-up (Svp), Sal, and Otd is required to distinguish the two subtypes. The Rh5 subtype requires sal and otd, while the Rh6 subtype requires seven-up (svp). EGFR signaling, otd, svp, and sal are also core components of PR development in the adult retina. However, they play very different roles in the two systems. Thus, even though adult R8 and larval PRs share the same rhodopsin fates, the genetic pathways that control their expression are surprisingly different.

We followed BO PR development from specification of precursors until the end of larval life using anatomical and molecular markers. Larval PRs develop from a group of cells located at the ventral tip of the optic placode, adjacent to the progenitors of the optic lobe primordium (Green et al. 1993) . The earliest precursor cells express the proneural gene ato in a highly dynamic manner during embryonic stages 10-12 ( Fig. 1A ; Daniel et al. 1999; Suzuki and Saigo 2000) (we obtained comparable results using either the ato-Gal4 driver or an anti-Ato antibody; data not shown). Expression of ato in PR precursors decreases during stage 12 until no expression is found after embryonic stage 13. During embryonic stage 12, BO precursors start to express the neuronal marker Elav as well as Krüppel (Kr) and Fasciclin II (FasII) (Schmucker et al. 1992; Daniel et al. 1999) , which were used as molecular markers for immature PRs throughout embryogenesis (Figs. 1B, 3A, below). During optic lobe invagination, larval PRs remain connected with the optic lobe primordium by the Bolwig Nerve (BN), which extends while the distance between the PRs and optic lobe primordium gradually increases (Schmucker et al. 1992) . By stage 15, all PRs are largely separated from the optic lobe primordium and BO is positioned at the anterior part of the embryonic head (Fig. 1B) , where it becomes associated with the head skeleton at embryonic stage 17 (Green et al. 1993) .
Larval PRs, whose number varies from eight to 16, start to express rh5 and rh6 by the end of embryogenesis (stage 16/17) and maintain rh expression throughout larval life (Fig. 1C,D) . Three or four BO PRs express Rh5 and the remaining eight to 10 express Rh6 (Fig. 1C,D) . We verified that rh1, rh3, and rh4, which had been previously reported to be expressed in BO (Pollock and Benzer 1988) were not expressed in the larval eye (data not shown). The PR-specific gene chaoptic (chp) becomes expressed in all larval PRs at about the same developmental stage (Fig. 6D, below) . By the end of embryogenesis, PRs are packed tightly and do not exhibit any obvious signs of further cellular differentiation. However, during early larval life, their morphology changes dramatically; cells become loosely packed and build up arborizationlike protrusions (Fig. 1D, arrow) . While Ato expression quickly disappears, the expression of Chp, Kr, Elav, Rh5, and Rh6 is maintained throughout larval life.
The expression of Rh5 and Rh6 in larval PRs is strongly reminiscent of the adult R8 PRs. Therefore, we tested whether wts and melt, which form a bistable loop of regulation required for the robust specification of Rh5 or Rh6 fate in adult R8, are also required in larval PRs. However we could not detect expression of wts or melt at any time during embryogenesis, as visualized using wts and melt enhancer trap lines. We also could not detect early maternal expression in embryos (data not shown). To test whether wts and melt are required for the subtype specification in the larval eye, we analyzed Rh5 and Rh6 expression in wts and melt mutant larvae. However, the expression of neither Rh5 nor Rh6 is affected ( Fig. 2A,B) . To manipulate the early phase of PR precursor specification and development, we made use of a sine oculis-Gal4 (so-Gal4), which starts to be expressed in the optic lobe placode at embryonic stage 10 and remains expressed in the optic lobe and all larval PRs throughout embryogenesis and larval life (Supplementary Fig. 1A,C) . Interestingly, the ectopic expression of UAS-wts or UAS-melt under the control of so-Gal4 did also not affect the expression Rh5 and Rh6 (Fig. 2C,D) . Furthermore the total number of larval PRs and the ratio of Rh5 PRs versus Rh6 PRs remain unaltered in both wts and melt gain of function (GOF) as well as in loss of function (LOF) (Fig. 2E) . Thus, in contrast to the adult retina, the specification of the Rh5 and Rh6 subtypes does not depend on wts and melt.
Egfr signaling and tll action orchestrate the development of the Rh6 subtype As in the adult eye, recruitment of BO PR precursor cells requires activation of the EGFR pathway. Primary BO precursors produce Spi, which is required in neighboring cells to develop as secondary precursors. In embryos mutant for spi, the immature larval eye only consists of three or four cells (Daniel et al. 1999 ). Therefore, we tested whether EGFR signaling is involved in the specification of larval PR subtypes and whether there is a correlation between primary precursors and rh5-expressing PRs or between secondary and rh6-expressing PRs. Because EGFR signaling has multiple earlier functions in the embryo, we misexpressed a dominant-negative form of EGFR (UAS-EGFR dn ) under the control of so-Gal4 to suppress EGFR activity in BO precursors. This results in the development of only three or four immature PRs as compared with ∼14 cells in the wild type (Fig. 3A,B) , a phenocopy of the BO in spi mutants (Daniel et al. 1999 ). All of the remaining three or four PRs all express Rh5 (Fig. 3D) as well as the general markers Elav, FasII, Kr, and Chp (Fig. 3B,F) . They also express the Rh5-subtypespecific marker sal (Fig. 3F, see below) , but not the Rh6-subtype-specific marker svp (see below). These results show that EGFR signaling is required for the develop- ment of Rh6 PRs and strongly suggests that primary precursors develop into the Rh5 subtype while secondary precursors give rise to the Rh6 subtype.
Activation of the EGFR pathway is relayed to the nucleus through the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade, which ultimately leads to the phosphorylation of nuclear effectors such as the Ets family transcription factors Pointed (Pnt) and Yan (O'Neill et al. 1994) . Both Yan and Pnt are expressed during stage 10/11 in the developing lobe primordium when larval PRs form; however their expression decreases during embryonic stage 12/13, and no expression can be detected at stage 15 (Supplementary Fig. 2 ; data not shown).
The orphan nuclear receptor Tll has an effect opposite to the EGFR signaling in specifying PR precursors versus optic lobe primordium. Tll is expressed in the optic lobe primordium but not in PR precursors. Removing tll function in the embryo leads to supernumerous immature PRs (Daniel et al. 1999) , suggesting that tll acts negatively on the development of secondary precursors. To test which subset is affected, we analyzed Rh5 and Rh6 expression in tll mutants at the end of embryogenesis, before tll mutants die. The number of Rh5 PRs remains largely unchanged. However, the number of Rh6 PRs is dramatically increased to 20-25 instead of the normal eight to 10 (Fig. 4D ). This suggests that tll inhibits adjacent cells from adapting the Rh6 cell fate.
Since the lack of EGFR signaling results in a smaller number of larval PRs due to cell death (Daniel et al. 1999) , the increased Rh6 PRs might result from the survival of adjacent optic lobe primordium cells that failed to die. We therefore expressed the apoptosis inhibitor UAS-p35 in optic lobe primordium under the control of so-Gal4. This leads to a high increase in the number of Rh6 PRs to ∼20-25, whereas the number of Rh5 PRs remains unchanged, similar to the loss of tll function (Fig. 4F ). This strongly supports the notion that EGFR signaling is required in cells surrounding the primary precursors to prevent their apoptosis induced by tll, and therefore allow their development as Rh6 PRs. In addi- Larval PR-subtype specification tion to its survival function, EGFR signaling might also be required for the acquisition of the Rh6 cell fate. To approach this question, we concomitantly misexpressed UAS-p35 and UAS-EGFR dn under the control of so-Gal4. This leads to a strong increase in the number of Rh6 PRs, to ∼20-25 without affecting the number of Rh5 PRs (Fig.  4G) , similar to the misexpression of UAS-p35 alone.
Thus EGFR signaling appears to be essential for the survival of the Rh6 subtype. However the immature precursors do not seem to depend on EGFR signaling for adapting the Rh6 cell fate. It is also possible that activity remaining in the EGFR dn context is able to induce the Rh6 fate while higher EGFR activity is required for survival.
In order to analyze the development, specification, and differentiation of the two subtypes of larval PRs, we looked for genes expressed in either the Rh5 or the Rh6 subtype. Among the genes required for adult PR development, pros and ss are key players in inner PR specification. However, we could not detect expression of Pros or Ss in developing BO PRs at any point during embryogenesis (data not shown). However, sal and svp are expressed in a subtype-specific fashion in the larval eye. During embryonic development, three or four immature PRs express sal ( Fig. 5A,B ; comparable results were obtained using sal-Gal4 or anti-Salm antibody; data not shown). sal expression starts during stage 13/14 and is maintained throughout embryogenesis and larval life. Its expression coincides precisely with rh5 ( Fig. 5C ) and is excluded from the Rh6 subtype (Fig. 5D) . svp shows the opposite expression pattern: Its expression is initiated during stage 13/14 and is maintained throughout embryogenesis and larval life in the Rh6 subtype, whereas it is excluded from the Rh5 subtype ( Fig. 5E-H anti-Svp antibody; data not shown). Thus sal and svp are expressed in complementary subsets of larval PR subtypes. The expression of both transcription factors precedes rhodopsin expression.
The sal genes encode two zinc finger transcription factors that are specifically expressed in adult inner PRs R7 and R8, where they are required to distinguish them from outer PRs (Mollereau et al. 2001 ). Since sal is exclusively expressed in the Rh5 subtype, prior to rh5 expression, we tested whether it is required for the development of this subtype. We thus analyzed the expression of Rh5 and Rh6 in sal mutants at the end of embryogenesis, when these mutants die. No expression of Rh5 can be detected in sal mutants, even though the correct Cold (Fig. 6C) . However, the general PR markers Elav, FasII, Kr, and Chp remain expressed in all PRs, suggesting that four PRs express neither Rh5 nor Rh6 ( Fig. 6C ; data not shown). Since rh1, rh3, and rh4 expression cannot be detected, these four PRs appear to be "empty" and devoid of PR molecules (data not shown). PRs of the larval eye project into the region of the dendritic arborizations of the larval pacemaker neurons. Axon termini of Rh5 and Rh6 PRs are generally directly adjacent to each other (Mazzoni et al. 2005) . In sal mutants, all larval PRs project into the correct target region of the late embryonic brain (Fig. 6G) . We compared the projection termini of empty PRs with those of Rh6 PRs ("empty" PR termini are identified by FasII staining and the absence of Rh6 staining). At embryonic stage 17 (just before these mutants die), axonal termini of "empty" PRs project correctly to the target region, adjacent to Rh6 termini (Fig.  6H,I ). Therefore sal is essential in the larval eye for the proper differentiation of the Rh5 PRs but not for their early specification or for axonal targeting.
In the adult eye, the orphan nuclear receptor svp is required posterior to the morphogenetic furrow for the specification of the R3/R4 and R1/R6 pairs, but not for their later differentiation (Mlodzik et al. 1990 ). In the larval eye, svp is exclusively expressed in Rh6 PRs prior to rh6 expression, suggesting that it might be involved in the development of this subtype. We analyzed the expression of Rh5 and Rh6 in svp mutant embryos at stage 17 (as for sal, svp mutants die at the end of embryogenesis). While the total number of PRs (as marked by Elav, FasII, Kr, and Chp) remains unchanged (Fig. 6B,E) in svp mutants, all PRs express Rh5 (Fig. 6B ) and no Rh6 expression is detectable. Therefore, Rh6 cells appear to have switched fate toward the Rh5 fate. Consistent with the transformation of PRs into Rh5 subtype, all PRs express sal in svp mutants (Fig. 6E ). This suggests that svp is necessary for the repression of sal in the Rh6 subtype, thus allowing expression of rh6. To test whether svp is sufficient for the Rh6 PR fate, we performed gain-offunction experiments using early (so-Gal4) or later sevenless-Gal4 (sev-Gal4) drivers. The sev-Gal4 driver starts to be expressed in all larval PRs during late embryonic stages 12/13, just after all immature PRs have formed. It remains expressed through larval life ( Supplementary  Fig. 1B,D; data not shown). In larvae that express UASsvp under the control of so-Gal4, no Rh5 expression can be detected, while all BO PRs express rh6 with no change in the overall number of PRs (Fig. 6F) . However, if sal expression is affected, it is not completely abolished, with one to three PRs still weakly expressing Sal (data not shown), arguing that Rh6 is now expressed in the Rh5 subtype. Later expression of UAS-svp under the control of sev-Gal4 does not result in alteration of Rh expression (data not shown). Thus, svp not only acts to repress sal in the Rh6 subtype, but it also acts as an activator of Rh6 expression since Sal and Rh6 can coexist in the same cell. In contrast ectopic expression of UASsalm under the control of so-Gal4 or of sev-Gal4 leads to no change of Rh5 or Rh6 expression. Expression of Svp remains unaffected, with about eight cells still expressing Svp (data not shown). Thus svp is necessary and sufficient to induce the Rh6 fate. In contrast sal is necessary but not sufficient for the Rh5 fate.
otd is required in the Rh5 subtype for rh5 expression and rh6 repression The homeodomain protein Otd is required in inner PRs of the adult retina for the activation of rh3 and rh5 in p ommatidia, whereas it is required in outer PRs to repress rh6 (Tahayato et al. 2003 ). In the adult retina, otd is expressed in all PRs. Similarly, otd is expressed in all embryonic immature PRs, and this expression is maintained during larval life. During early development, otd acts as a major component for patterning the anterior region of the embryo (Cohen and Jurgens 1990) . During stages 8/9, otd expression spans the entire cephalic region (Fig. 7A) and becomes subsequently restricted to more anterior regions and regions giving rise to the brain. However otd expression is excluded from large parts of the optic lobe primordium as well as from the region giving rise to larval PRs (Fig. 7B) . Starting at stage 12, however, otd expression is reinitiated in the ventral lateral part of the optic lobe primordium, the region that will give rise to the precursors of larval PRs. otd remains expressed in all PRs throughout embryogenesis and larval life (Fig. 7C-F) . otd is not required for the formation of larval PRs (nor the larval optic lobe primordium): Even though otd-null mutant embryos show severe head involution defects, the normal number of immature PRs is formed (data not shown). To investigate whether otd is involved in larval PR-subtype specification, we analyzed Rh5 and Rh6 expression in viable otd uvi mutants ( Vandendries et al. 1996) . In otd uvi , larval PRs do not express Rh5 while the total number of PRs remains the same (Fig. 7G,H ) and all PRs express Rh6 (Fig. 7G) . About four cells still express sal, but these cells now express Rh6 instead of Rh5 (Fig. 7H) . Interestingly, the number of Svp-expressing cells is not altered, with four Svp-negative PRs expressing Rh6 (data not shown). This indicates that, in the Rh5 subtype, otd acts as an inhibitor of rh6 expression and is required for Rh5 expression. As expression of otd is unaltered in sal mutants (data not shown), otd, like sal, seems to be necessary but not sufficient for Rh5 expression. otd and sal expression does not depend on each other, and since they are both required for Rh5 expression, they appear to act in parallel pathways.
In this study, we describe the genetic mechanisms underlying the specification of BO PR subtypes. The larval eye consists of two distinct PR subtypes, three to four PRs containing blue-sensitive Rh5 and eight to 10 containing green-sensitive Rh6. Primary precursors, which give rise to the Rh5-subtype PRs, signal to the surrounding tissue to develop as secondary precursors, which become the Rh6 subtype. EGFR signaling is required for the survival of these secondary precursors. The combi- natorial action of the three transcription factors Sal, Svp, and Otd then orchestrates the differentiation of the two PR subtypes. Interestingly, even though larval PRs and the adult R8 have the same rhodopsin content, the mechanisms to establish their fates are remarkably different.
Specification of adult PRs starts with the proliferation of undifferentiated cells anterior to the morphogenetic furrow and the recruitment of individual PRs into ommatidia posterior to the morphogenetic furrow in a tightly regulated spatiotemporal manner. R8 is first specified by ato and does not depend on EGFR signaling (Jarman et al. 1994; Freeman 1996) . Sequential recruitment of all other PRs (R2/5, R3/4, R1/6, and then R7) is dependent on EGFR signaling (Freeman 1996; Raabe 2000; Nagaraj and Banerjee 2004) . Similarly, in the larval eye, primary precursors express ato and are independent of EGFR signaling while secondary precursors need EGFR signaling for their development. Primary precursors develop into the Rh5 subtype while the Rh6-subtype identity corresponds to secondary precursors.
During larval PR development, EGFR signaling is required for the Rh6 but not the Rh5 subtype. tll inhibits this process by preventing the adjacent optic lobe primordium from responding to EGFR signaling (Daniel et al. 1999; Dumstrei et al. 2002; Chang et al. 2003a ). However, expression of tll is not negatively regulated by EGFR signaling (Daniel et al. 1999; Dumstrei et al. 2002; Chang et al. 2003a) . Blocking apoptosis or removing tll function both result in supernumerary Rh6 cells, indicating that cells that should have died in response to tll function become Rh6 PRs (Fig. 8A) . Secondary precursors do not appear to require maintenance of EGFR signaling to survive. During later developmental stages, all immature PRs express sevenless, another gene encoding a Receptor Tyrosine Kinase as well as its ligand, Boss (S.G. Specher and C. Desplan, unpubl.), which could act redundantly with EGFR later in development. However, we see no effect of mutating boss or sev, either on larval PR number or on Rh5/Rh6 expression (S.G. Specher and C. Desplan, unpubl.). It could be that late EGFR activity compensates for the loss of Sev activity, comparable with the adult R7 cells, where EGFR is sufficient to replace Sev (Freeman 1996) .
What is the function of the EGFR pathway in antagonizing tll function? The Ets transcription factors yan and pnt are both expressed during the period of secondary precursor specification. In response to EGFR signaling, Yan acts as a repressor and Pnt as an activator. Their tightly controlled activation, cross-regulation, and competition for binding sites are essential for appropriate EGFR signaling. It is difficult, however, to test their function in BO PR formation, as mutants die with strong patterning defects in the embryo. We could test the function of EGFR because we were able to inhibit its function late, specifically in the optic lobe region, by misexpressing a dominant-negative form of EGFR. This likely inhibits but might not completely abolish endogenous EGFR signaling. Thus, even though concomitantly preventing cell death and EGFR signaling restores Rh6 PRs, it is possible that basal levels of EGFR signaling are sufficient for the specification of Rh6 PR specification, but not for survival. The mechanism by which tll affects secondary precursor development remains elusive. tll might prevent cells from developing as secondary precursors, leading them to undergo apoptosis. Only cells that receive enough EGFR signal near primary PR precursors are rescued. Alternatively a second signal could make tll-expressing cells undergo apoptosis. Notch and hedgehog signaling have also been shown to be involved the development of larval PRs and may provide an alternative source for proper subtype specification and tll acts in the surrounding tissue to inhibit secondary precursor development. Primary precursors give rise to the Rh5 PR subtype, whereas secondary precursors give rise to the Rh6 PR subtype. In the Rh5 PR subtype, sal and otd are required for Rh5 expression, and otd further for the repression of Rh6. In the Rh6 subtype, svp is required for Rh6 expression and for the repression of sal expression. (B) The negative feedback loop of wts and melt mediates the decision of R8 to express Rh6 or Rh5. Which way the loop swings depends on an instructive signal of the overlying R7 cell. The presence of gene expression is indicated by black type and its absence is indicated with gray type. Arrows shown in black (for activation) and red (for repression) indicate an active interaction; gray arrows indicate the absence of this interaction.
Larval PR-subtype specification
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on November 4, 2016 -Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from survival of secondary precursors (Green et al. 1993; Schmucker et al. 1994; Suzuki and Saigo 2000) .
During larval eye development, sal is only required for the expression of Rh5 but not for the specification of Rh5-subtype fate. First, ectopic activation of Sal is not sufficient to induce Rh5 expression. Further, sal is still expressed in cells that have adopted the Rh6 subtype due to ectopic svp expression. In contrast, svp is required and sufficient for the Rh6 subtype where it represses the Rh5-subtype fate. Interestingly, svp is not only required for the repression of sal, but is also necessary for Rh6 expression (Fig. 8A) . In the adult retina, svp is necessary for the specification of the R3/R4 and R1/R6 pairs (Mlodzik et al. 1990; Domingos et al. 2004a,b) where it is also required for the repression of sal: R3/R4 are transformed into R7 cells in svp mutants (Domingos et al. 2004b) . However, the upstream mechanisms by which the expression of sal and svp is controlled in larval PRs remains elusive. There may be an unknown signal from primary precursors that induces secondary precursors by controlling svp expression. This signal is probably not EGFR, since EGFR dn secondary cells that are rescued from death by p35 still express svp.
In the adult retina otd is required for the expression of rh3 and rh5 and for the repression of Rh6 in outer PRs. In the larval eye, is also expressed in all PRs, but it is not required for the formation of larval PRs. During their terminal differentiation, otd is required, only in the Rh5 subtype, for Rh5 expression and Rh6 repression (Fig. 8A) . Since otd only functions in the context of sal expression, it acts as a permissive factor for Rh regulation. It seems likely that otd and sal act in parallel in the Rh5 subtype: Otd expression is not altered in sal mutants and Sal expression is not altered in otd mutants. Further, Otd, which binds directly to the rh3, rh5, and rh6 enhancers in the adult eye, likely acts in a similar fashion in larval PRs (Tahayato et al. 2003) .
There are interesting similarities and differences between PR-subtype specification in the larval and adult eyes. Most strikingly, the two Rhs expressed in the larval eye are R8 Rhs. The type of Rh expressed in R8 is instructed by R7 and maintained by the wts/melt bistable loop (Fig. 8B) . In contrast, in the larva, there are no additional PRs in BO to instruct the Rh5 and Rh6 PR fate and the expression of these genes does not depend on wts and melt. Since misexpression of wts or melt does not affect larval PRs, the downstream effectors of the loop must be absent or not functioning in the larval eye. Rh5 PRs, which are specified first, might be a source of an instructive signal for the Rh6-subtype fate. Alternatively, this signal might arise from non-BO cells. However, we have not yet been able to determine its identity. Finally, larval PRs are not specified or distributed stochastically in BO, as the two groups that express Rhr or Rh6 are physically distinct, presumably explaining why there is not need for the bistable loop of wts and melt. Therefore, even though the Rh fates of larval PRs and adult R8 are identical, they achieve their fates through very distinct mechanisms.
Primary sensory precursors also induce secondary precursors in the development of the peripheral nervous system, in chordotonal and external sensory organs. After the delamination of chordotonal or sensory organ precursors (SOP), these cells signal to the overlaying ectoderm to induce delamination of secondary precursors (Okabe and Okano 1997; zur Lage and Jarman 1999; zur Lage et al. 2004 ). EGFR signaling is essential for the survival of BO secondary precursors, whereas in SOPs, it induces the delamination of secondary precursors. sal is also required to adopt the proper final cell fate both in larval PR precursors (Rh5 vs. Rh6) and embryonic SOPs (nonneuronal oenocytes vs. sensory neurons) (Elstob et al. 2001 ). However, oenocyte specification completely depends on sal, whereas larval eye primary precursors only require sal for Rh5 expression (Elstob et al. 2001 ). Thus, the two systems use EGFR signaling and Sal differently.
Larval PR precursors do not further divide, while SOPs later undergo asymmetric cell division to produce two nonidentical daughter cells. This may be due to the fact that BO only contain two different subtypes, whose identity correlate with primary or secondary precursors. Further, larval PR precursors develop in a group of adjacent cells as part of a placode. Thus, classical SOP specification using Notch signaling and lateral inhibition does not seem to occur to specify PR precursors. It will of great interest to further investigate the similarities and differences in the molecular mechanisms underlying the development of these sensory organs and how they are controlled.

For wild-type comparison we used yw 122 ; yw 122 , sp/CyO, TM2/ TM6b; or heterozygous siblings of mutant alleles. For sal mutant analysis, the sal 16 and a small Deficiency-Df(2L)32FP-5, which removes salm and salr-were used, balanced over CyO, Dfd-YFP; both fly strains gave comparable results (Kuhnlein et al. 1994; Elstob et al. 2001) . For svp mutant analysis, the svp E22 was used, balanced over TM6b, Dfd-YFP (Mlodzik et al. 1990 ). For tll mutant analysis, the tll 1 and tll 149 were used, balanced over TM6b, Dfd-YFP. For sal, tll, and svp, homozygous mutants were identified by the absence of Dfd-YFP (Bloomington Stock Center). We used the viable otd uvi allele (Vandendries et al. 1996) . The following fly strains were used: so-Gal4 (Chang et al. 2003b) , sev-Gal4 (Therrien et al. 1999) , otd-Gal4 (T. Cook, pers. comm.), ato-Gal4 (Hassan et al. 2000) , svp H162 -LacZ (Elstob et al. 2001 (Kuhnlein and Schuh 1996) , UASsvp (Kramer et al. 1995) , UAS-CD8GFP, UAS-p35, UAS-pnt
, and UAS-yan (Bloomington). Embryos were staged according to Campos-Ortega and Hartenstein (1997) .
Embryos were dechorionated, fixed, and immunostained according to previously published protocols (Therianos et al. 1995) . Primary antibodies were rabbit anti-Rh6 1:10,000 (Tahayato et al. 2003) , mouse anti-Rh5 1:20, anti-Rh3 1:20, or anti-Rh4 1:20 (Chou et al. 1996) , mouse anti-Nrt 1:10 (Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank [DSHB]), mouse anti-Rh1 1:20 (DSHB), mouse anti-FasII 1:10 (Lin and Goodman 1994), rat anti-Elav 1:30 (DSHB), goat anti-Ato 1:1000 (Jarman et al. 1993) , sheep anti-GFP (Biogenesis), rabbit anti-Sal 1:200 (Kuhnlein et al. 1994) , mouse anti-Svp 1:1000 (Kanai et al. 2005) , mouse antiPros 1:50 (DSHB), mouse anti-Chp 1:10 (DSHB), rat anti-Otd 1:200 (Hirth et al. 2003) , rat anti-Kr 1:300 (Kosman et al. 1998) , rab anti-Pnt P1 (Alvarez et al. 2003) , anti-Yan (Rebay and Rubin 1995) , guinea pig anti-Ss 1:500 (Kim et al. 2006) , and mouse anti-␤GAL 1:20 (DSHB). Secondary antibodies used for confocal microscopic analysis were Alexa-488, Alexa-555, and Alexa-647 antibodies generated in goat (Molecular probes), all at 1:300-1:500 dilution. Embryos were mounted in Vectashield H-1000 (Vector). For the analysis of the larval BO, the head skeleton was separated from epidermis, imaginal discs, and brain and fixed for 15 min in 4% formaldehyde/PBS. The chitinous head skeleton was then carefully opened on the dorsal and ventral midline using sharpened minutien pins (0.1-mm diameter, Fisher Scientific Tools).
For laser confocal microscopy, a Leica TCS SP was used. Optical sections ranged from 0.2 to 1.5 µm, recorded in line average mode with a picture size of 512 × 512 pixels or 1024 × 1024 pixels. Captured images from optical sections were arranged and processed using Leica confocal Software (LCS). Complete series of optical sections were imported and processed using ImageJ. Generation of three-dimensional digital models and raw tiff stacks (stacks of optical sections) were done using AMIRA (Mercury Computer Systems) as previously described (Sprecher et al. 2006) .
Spinal cord injuries (SCI) cause an irreversible disconnection between the body and the brain. This disconnection implies a deprivation of somatosensory input to and motor output from the brain. The extent of this deprivation depends on the level and completeness of the lesion. While cervical SCI leads to tetraplegia, a clinical condition with impaired sensory-motor functions in both upper and lower limbs, SCI below the seventh cervical spinal cord segment leads to paraplegia, where deficits affect lower but not upper limbs.
Studies indicate that sensorimotor deprivation in SCI may induce alterations in the bodily-self as indexed by the Rubber Hand Illusion (RHI), where the induction of a visuo-tactile conflict allows rapid changes in body-ownership (Botvinick and Cohen, 1998) . In initial studies of the RHI healthy individuals were asked to look at a rubber hand that was stroked by the examiner, synchronously or asynchronously with their hidden from view real hand. It appeared that only during synchronous stimulation was the rubber hand perceived as part of the participants' own body (index of ownership of an artificial hand) and the position of the real hand was perceived as having shifted toward the rubber hand ("proprioceptive drift," index of illusory perception of body in space) (Botvinick and Cohen, 1998; Ehrsson et al., 2005; Tsakiris and Haggard, 2005; Longo et al., 2008; Mohan et al., 2012; Schaefer et al., 2013) .
The first time that the RHI paradigm was applied to SCI participants demonstrated that SCI did not alter subjective indices of the illusory hand ownership (Lenggenhager et al., 2012) . However, proprioceptive drift was found to be deviated only in subjects with defective hand perception, suggesting that plasticity-related cortical changes might influence the dynamics of the bodily-self (Lenggenhager et al., 2012) . The RHI has subsequently been used to induce a restoration of impaired hand somatosensivity in two SCI patients (Lenggenhager et al., 2013) .
In many previous papers the "proprioceptive drift" is defined as an objective measure of the RHI. We contend it has to be considered as a subjective response. We suggest that this measure is at least as subjective as the point of subjective equivalence (PSE) (Gescheider, 1997) , i.e., the index widely used in psychophysics research which is computed starting from the participants' answers about the perception or the lack of perception of a stimulus, or the perceived difference between two sensory stimuli. For these reasons in this study we defined, the "proprioceptive drift" as a subjective index of perception of the body in space. We propose that psychogalvanic response (Armel and Ramachandran, 2003; Ferri et al., 2013) , the change in temperature (Moseley et al., 2008) , etc. are considered objective indexes in rubber-hand or full-body illusion studies.
Brain reorganization induced by a reduction in somatosensory and motor inputs has been demonstrated in studies on animals and humans (Nahum et al., 2013) . Crucial for the present research, this type of reorganization may follow topographic rules. For example, a single cell recording study on monkeys deprived of somatosensory input due to an extended dorsal rhizotomy, demonstrated that the cortical territories formerly mapping the de-afferented skin regions (e.g., the hand) were driven by inputs coming from brain regions with adjacent, intact representation (e.g., the face) (Pons et al., 1991) . Evidence for the perceptual correlates of this topographic remapping process has been provided by studies on individuals with upper-limb (Ramachandran et al., 1992; Aglioti et al., 1997) , lower-limb (Aglioti et al., 1994a) or breast (Aglioti et al., 1994b) amputation and phantom perception of the lost body part. In particular, tactile stimuli on the face ipsilaterally to hand or finger amputations induced in a considerable number of patients the sensation of being touched not only on the face but also on the phantom hand (Ramachandran et al., 1992) or finger (Aglioti et al., 1997) . Consistent and precise, but topographically disorganized, double sensations were evoked by tactile stimuli applied to the contralesional hypoaesthesic hand in a patient with a selective lesion involving hand representation in the primary somatosensory cortex (Aglioti et al., 1999) .
Based on the notion that the somatosensory and motor brain representation of the face and the hand are contiguous, double sensations were interpreted as an index of remapping of the face on the de-afferented hand representation. The inherent link between hand and face representations is also supported by studies on healthy subjects in whom complete temporary anaesthesia of the thumb rapidly induced the sensation that the size of the lips increased by up to 50% (Gandevia and Phegan, 1999) . Neurophysiological evidence for face-hand remapping has been provided by an EEG study documenting that tactile stimulation of the hand activates the cortical representation of the face in people who had undergone cosmetic injections of botulinum toxin to treat wrinkles (Haenzi et al., 2014) . As previously mentioned, deprivation related neuroplasticity may also be at play after spinal cord lesions. What remains unknown is whether the perceptual correlates of the plasticity found in SCI follows erratic rules (Moore et al., 2000) or may also occur according to somewhat topographic organization.
We explored this issue by applying a novel version of the classic RHI paradigm to healthy, paraplegic, and tetraplegic people. Based on the study on monkeys with cervical SCI who showed an expansion of the face representation in the primary and non-primary somatosensory cortex toward nearby areas (Tandon et al., 2009) , we hypothesized that tetraplegics, but not paraplegics and healthy people, would experience the RHI after stimulation of their cheek synchronously with rubber hand stimulation. We modified two main aspects of the classic RHI paradigm (Botvinick and Cohen, 1998) . The first concerns the stimulation which was applied not only to the participants real hand but also to their cheek. The second is that rubber hand and real hand were vertically aligned with the former in a higher position with respect to the latter. We measured any possible vertical drift in the perceived position of the participants real hand (Bekrater-Bodmann et al., 2012) . We expected only the tetraplegics to show indices of RHI in the Face-Synchronous condition, due to possible mechanisms of plasticity in the somatosensory networks. Instead, in the paraplegics and healthy individuals, we expected to replicate RHI effects exclusively following Synchronous Hand-stimulation.

Sixteen tetraplegics, sixteen paraplegics and sixteen neurologically healthy participants participated in the study. All participants were right-handed and had normal or corrected-tonormality vision. The three groups were gender-, age-and education-matched (log-linear analysis on gender data: χ 2 (2) = 2.1646, p = 0.34, One-Way ANOVA on age data: F (2,45) = 0.90, p = 0.41, One-Way ANOVA on education, converted in a numerical value from 1 = junior school to 4 = bachelor degree: F (2,45) = 0.84, p = 0.44).
For all SCI participants, the Neurological Level of Injury (NLI) and the American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale (AIS, index of completeness of lesion) were collected, according to the International Standards for Neurological Classification of Spinal Cord Injury (Kirshblum et al., 2011) .
The NLI is defined as the more rostral spinal cord segment where both the sensory and motor functions are spared. This does not exclude the possibility that some motor or sensory functions are spared below this level. This indeed is what may happen in cases of incomplete lesions (Kirshblum et al., 2011) . The AIS gives information about the completeness of lesions. The AIS score (ranging from A to E in a decreasing order of impairment) is calculated on the basis of motor and sensory functions preserved at the level of sacral segments S4-S5 (that are the most caudals) (Kirshblum et al., 2011) . Only SCI participants with scores of "A" (absence of sensory and motor functions at S4-S5) or "B" (spared sensory but not motor functions at S4-S5) in the AIS were recruited in this study and assigned to the Tetraplegics and Paraplegics groups according to their NLI (upper or lower C7 level, respectively). In the Tetraplegics group, left-hand tactile perception was tested. Taking into consideration both the definitions of NLI and AIS, it is clear that, also even if the NLI is very high and the AIS is "A," there is the possibility of spared sensory sensations in the left hand and, on the other side, that a low NLI and an AIS of "B" does not guarantee spared tactile sensations on the left hand. Furthermore, the Spinal Cord Independence Measure-III (SCIM-3) was administered in order to quantify the degree of functional autonomy (Invernizzi et al., 2010) . Demographical and clinical data are reported in Table 1 . The study was approved by the Ethics committee of the Province of Verona (Prot. N. 40378) and was conducted in accordance with the ethical standards of the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki. All participants gave their informed consent. 
As shown in Figure 1A , a wooden box was built to allow the positioning of the left Real Hand and the Rubber Hand, one positioned exactly on top of the other so that they corresponded. The wooden box (H:50 cm, W:30 cm, D:40 cm) was divided into two compartments: the real hand rested upon the dividing plank inside the box, while the rubber hand was positioned on the top of the box (20 cm above the real hand). Both the participants right and left arms were hidden from view by a black cloth. The rubber hand was similar to a normal left hand. A ruler with a sliding indicator was employed so that participants could indicate the perceived position of their real hand during experimental manipulations (see below). The ruler was placed on the left side of the box with the numbers (in mm) covered so that the participants could not see them (range of shifting = 44 cm, 22 cm above and below the real hand).
Preparation of the participants: Participants sat in their wheelchair (Tetraplegics and Paraplegics groups) or on a normal chair (Healthy group). The box was placed laterally to the left of each participant. The real hand was placed inside the box in a comfortable position and the rubber hand was placed more or less at the same height as the participants elbow. The participants wore special blinkers to prevent them from seeing the Q-tip approaching their cheek in the Face-conditions. The special blinkers consisted of a simple eyeglass frame with a little (5 × 4 cm) cloth attached to the left eyeglass temple. Furthermore, the box was covered with a black cloth for the whole duration of the experiment (pauses included), to avoid any additional visuo-spatial information in the experimental conditions (see below). The participants were asked to keep their hands still. Experimental Conditions: The experiment was divided into four conditions ( Figure 1C ) involving a combination of Stimulation Type (Synchronous, Asynchronous) and Body Part Stimulated (Hand, Face). The four conditions were run in separate blocks: (i) Hand-Synchronous; (ii) Hand-Asynchronous; (iii) Face-Synchronous; (iv) Face-Asynchronous. A pause in which participants could move their real hand was allowed after two blocks. The participants left cheek and the index finger of the rubber hand were stimulated by a Q-tip in the Face-conditions and the dorsum of the participants real left index finger and the same location on the rubber hand were stimulated in the Hand-conditions. All conditions were counterbalanced across participants. Each stimulation block consisted of two phases ( Figure 1D ).
The participants were asked to observe the rubber hand positioned on the wooden box for 2 min. The rubber hand was then covered and participants had to estimate the vertical position of the real hand (Observation Baseline), using a verbal command to stop the mobile indicator of the ruler (moved by the experimenter) at the perceived position of their hand. When the participants stopped the mobile indicator, the experimenter recorded the position on the ruler (mm). The mobile indicator was then positioned at one of the extremes of its range as the starting position for the subsequent hand position estimation trial. The mobile indicator was thus moved in either top-down or bottom-up alternate directions. This procedure was repeated at intervals of 30 s for a total of 4 measurements (total 90 s.). The direction (top-down or bottom-up) of the first estimate was counterbalanced across participants. 2. The Stimulation Phase.
While the participants looked at the rubber hand, a stimulation was synchronously or asynchronously administered to both the rubber hand and either the real hand or cheek of the participant. The tactile strokes were manually administered by the experimenter for 2 min by means of Q-tips. In the Hand-conditions, the rubber hand and the real hand were stimulated on dorsum of the index finger, independently of the tactile sensitivity of the real hand. In the Face-conditions, the strokes were administered to the index finger of the rubber hand and along an ideal horizontal line on the participants cheek, starting from the zygomaticus muscle (below the left eye) and moving toward the nose (see Figure 1B) .
While in the Synchronous conditions the two stimulations were administered simultaneously, a temporal discrepancy was introduced in the Asynchronous conditions between the touch to the participants body part and the observed touch on the rubber hand. After stimulation, the rubber hand was covered and the participants were requested to estimate their real hand position (Stim. Estimation, Figure 1D ). Subsequently, the participants answered a 6-item questionnaire ( Table 2 ) derived from one created by Botvinick and Cohen (1998) . They indicated their agreement with each item on a 10-point scale ranging from 0 ("I totally disagree") to 10 ("I totally agree"). The first three statements were designed to capture the phenomenology of the RHI (Illusion Related Questions, IRQ), whereas the other questions were designed to be Illusion Control Questions (ICQ) (see Table 2 ). The whole experiment lasted about 40 min.
Studies on healthy individuals suggest that the tendency to experience illusory body phenomena may be related to personality (MacLachlan et al., 2003) . With the aim of exploring possible personality effects on the RHI, all participants were submitted to the Big-Five Inventory (BFI-10, Rammstedt and John, 2007) and the Tellegen Absorption Scale (TAS, Tellegen and Atkinson, 1974) . The BFI-10 is a self-report interview designed to measure five dimensions of personality. The TAS (Tellegen and Atkinson, 1974) assesses the tendency to absorb others experiences, selfaltering experiences and a broader trait of openness to experience.
All analyses were performed using R (R Development Core Team, 2013), ggplot2 (Wickham, 2009 ) for graphical representations, the package lme4 ver. 1.1-5 for Mixed Linear Effects analyses (Bates et al., 2013) , and α was set to 0.05. In multiple testing, significances were adjusted via false-discovery-rate procedure (FDR) (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) . For each experimental condition, the drift was computed by subtracting the mean of the estimations in each Observation Baseline from the Stimulation condition. In order to avoid inflation of Type I error, caused by the small sample, we used two alternative approaches that converged on similar results. First of all we dichotomised data and analysed them via log-linear models using as criterion the 95% Confidence-Interval upperbound of all participants (drifts lower than the criterion = 0, otherwise = 1). As post-hoc analyses we used χ 2 tests FDR corrected. Furthermore, a Mixed Linear Effect model was applied to drift data, without any dichotomization. The Mixed Linear Effect Model (for detailed explanations see statistics handbooks like Pinheiro and Bates, 2000; Bates, 2010) , are used in previous studies (e.g., Fugard et al., 2009; Kliegl et al., 2009) . For the overall analysis of the model, parametric bootstrap confidence intervals for the tests (Wald tests) and bootstrapped p-values were computed (see Efron and Tibshirani, 1994) . FDR corrected t-tests were used as post-hoc tests.
Likert scale values in the RHI questionnaire values are organised as ordinal data. Therefore the best suited analyses are the non-parametric ones. The ICQ are questions not related to the illusion, that could be considered as a measure of the participant response bias, namely the tendency of participants to give the answers that they think could be in accord with the experimenter expectancy. This consideration is also supported by the empirical observation that in the majority of RHI experiments, if the illusion is present, the IRQ have higher values while the ICQ have lower values (Botvinick and Cohen, 1998; Aimola Davies et al., 2010; Bekrater-Bodmann et al., 2012) . Therefore, to understand if an illusory effect in a condition was present, testing IRQ vs. ICQ could be an effective test. However, testing IRQ vs. ICQ or Thus, we assessed two dependent variables for each condition, namely: (i) the proprioceptive drift, which is considered to be an index of the perceived position of the limb-in-space and (ii) the subjective report in the questionnaire, considered as an index of ownership of the rubber hand.
Personality traits (BFI-10), absorption (TAS) and functional independence (SCIM-3) were analysed to test the differences between groups and any effects on drift and IRQ-ICQ.

A log-linear model was applied to the number of drifts, with Group (Tetraplegics, Paraplegics, Healthy), Stimulation-Type (Synchronous and Asynchronous) and Body-Part (Hand, Face) as factors. The three-way interaction was statistically significant (χ 2 (2) = 7.5073, p = 0.02). Pairwise-χ 2 -tests (FDR corrected) between groups only showed significant differences in the Hand-Synchronous condition, with more drifts in the Healthy group than in the Paraplegics group (drift number: Healthy = 9, Paraplegics = 1; χ 2
(1) = 6.879, p = 0.05, φ = 14.66) and the Tetraplegics group (drift number: Tetraplegics = 0; χ 2 (1) = 9.581, p = 0.02, φ = 17.30). In the Tetraplegics group, the comparison between subjects with spared hand tactile-sensitivity and subjects with sensory deficits was not significant in any of the conditions (all p-values > 0.56). In Figure 2 a graphical representation.
In the Mixed Linear Effect model we used as fixed factors the Stimulation-Type (Synchronous, Asynchronous), the Body Part (Hand, Face) and the Group (Healthy, Paraplegics, Tetraplegics), and Subject as random factor. The three-way interaction turned out to be statistically significant (Wald χ 2 (2) = 9.43, CI = −6.39, 20.33, p < 0.01). Post-hoc t-tests FDR corrected were computed, comparing Synchronous vs. Asynchronous stimulation for each Body Part and Group. Only the comparison in the Healthy group in the Hand condition reached the statistical significance (p = 0.0125).
For each group we performed a One-Way Friedman ANOVA on IRQ-ICQ responses, with the Stimulation-Type and Body-Part factors collapsed into a unique 4-level Condition within-subject factor. A significant effect of Condition (Friedman's χ 2 (3) = 77.45, p < 0.0001) was found. The Friedman's tests were still significant after dividing the analysis according to the groups (Healthy group: χ 2 (3) = 28.63, p < 0.0001; Paraplegics group: χ 2 (3) = 39.14, p < 0.0001; Tetraplegics group: χ 2 (3) = 17.46, p < 0.0001). A Kruskal-Wallis test was applied to the IRQ-ICQ scores for the Synchronous condition minus the IRQ-ICQ scores for the Asynchronous condition, with the Group and Body Part factors collapsed in a unique 6-levels factor. The Kruskal-Wallis test showed a statistically significant effect (Kruskal-Wallis χ 2 (5) = 27.2807; p = 0.0001). This result indicates that the three groups have different values in the RHI questionnaire in the different conditions.
In the Tetraplegics group, Wilcoxon tests (FDR corrected) showed significantly greater values in IRQ than ICQ responses in the Hand-Synchronous (W = 550.5, p = 0.0001, r = 0.75), Hand-Asynchronous (W = 292.5, p = 0.026, r = 0.41) and Face-Synchronous conditions (W = 258.5, p = 0.024, r = 0.47). In the Paraplegics group, significant values were found in the Hand-Synchronous (W = 780, p < 0.0001, r = 1.03) and HandAsynchronous conditions (W = 425, p = 0.0002, r = 0.66). Finally, in the Healthy group the only significant effect was in the Hand-Synchronous condition (W = 903, p < 0.0001, r = 1.05).
In the Tetraplegics group, no difference between participants with impaired or spared hand tactile sensitivity was found (all pvalues > 0.24). For a graphical representation, see Figure 3. correlations were found between drifts or questionnaire responses and the TAS, the BFI-10, the SCIM-3 and the NLI.


This study explored whether RHI (which involves a process of integrating visual and tactile input) may constitute a reliable proxy for exploring and understanding the plasticity of bodily representations in people with SCI who suffer from massive disconnection of the body from the brain. There were three new, potentially important findings. The first is that the level of the lesion seems to influence the probability that the RHI will occur. More specifically, the more massively disconnected Tetraplegics group showed indices of ownership of the fake hand, as inferred from the questionnaire, both in the Hand (Synchronous and Asynchronous) and in the Face-Synchronous conditions. The less massively disconnected Paraplegics group showed subjective indices of RHI only in the two Hand conditions. Finally the Healthy group showed the illusion exclusively in the Hand-Synchronous condition. This picture indicates that the ownership component of RHI is related to different degrees of disconnection-related, topographic plasticity. The second finding is that the index of perception of body in space, as inferred from the drift, was found only in the Healthy group and only in the Hand-Synchronous condition. This suggests that this component of RHI is profoundly altered by somatosensory and motor bodybrain disconnection. Finally, personality traits and the degree of functional autonomy in SCI do not modulate RHI.
Studies on healthy people demonstrate that if they see a tactile stimulus administered to a fake hand and feel a simultaneous tactile stimulus on their own real hand (hidden from view), an illusion of incorporation of the fake hand is induced and/or the feeling that the felt tactile sensation is projected onto the rubber hand (Pavani et al., 2000; Aimola Davies et al., 2010; Haans et al., 2012) . Moreover, in its canonical description, the manifestation of RHI requires not only synchronicity of stimulation but the rubber hand must also be congruent with the real one in terms of position and identity (Tsakiris and Haggard, 2005; Zopf et al., 2010) . Studies also indicate that the RHI may be stronger in the vertical version (i.e., with the rubber hand positioned above the real hand) as compared to the original horizontal version (BekraterBodmann et al., 2012) . By adopting the vertical version of the RHI paradigm, we confirmed that in healthy subjects the phenomenal component of RHI is triggered by synchronous hand stimulation. Significantly, we demonstrated that for participants with SCI this component of RHI is greater in people with a higher level of the lesion who suffer from more massive deprivation. One likely explanation for these results has to do with evidence of functional and structural reorganization after de-afferentation of regions involved in somatosensory and motor processing (Çermik et al., 2006; Castro et al., 2007; Wrigley et al., 2009; Aguilar et al., 2010; Freund et al., 2011b; Henderson et al., 2011; Freund et al., 2013; Humanes-Valera et al., 2013; Sabre et al., 2013) . Our result is in keeping with the direct demonstration of possible acrossbody parts remapping in people afflicted by SCI. For example, in tetraplegics who move a body part with intact representation (e.g., the tongue), the focus of neural activity in the primary motor cortex shifts toward the de-afferented upper limb representation with a strong correlation between the degree of SCI and the shift (Mikulis et al., 2002) . In a similar vein, shifts of the cortical sensorimotor representations of intact body parts toward disconnected ones have been reported after SCI (Kokotilo et al., 2009 ). The Face-Hand illusion effect found in tetraplegics (but not in paraplegics and healthy people) may thus be interpreted as a perceptual index of topographical cortical and subcortical remapping (Freund et al., 2013) .This is in keeping with what was reported in an amputee patient who underwent hands transplant, and may be the effect of co-existing hand-face representations (Farnè et al., 2002) . The increased sense of ownership of the fake hand as indicated by the questionnaire expands our previous study reporting a comparable effect in SCI and healthy subjects (Lenggenhager et al., 2012) . Moreover, our study contributes to previous studies showing feeling of ownership may occur not only after synchronous stroking but also after asynchronous stroking (Rohde et al., 2011) . Indeed in our study the subjective sense of ownership of the fake hand was induced in SCI groups even in the asynchronous hand stimulation condition. The fact that somatosensory deficits of the hand being stimulated did not correlate with the participants reports in the questionnaire suggests that the integrity of tactuo-proprioceptive information (likely driving bottom-up modulations) does not influence the questionnaire component of the RHI. Thus, we suggest that top-down modulations, exerted as a result of observing the fake hand, mediate the embodiment of the rubber hand and the projection of sensations onto it. This may be in keeping with studies using the mirror box illusion in which amputee patients experience ownership of a rubber hand seen in a mirror in the absence of tactile stimuli on their intact hand (Giummarra et al., 2010) . In a similar vein, studies on brain damaged patients indicate that the mere sight of a rubber hand brings about a sense of incorporation of an alien hand (Fotopoulou et al., 2008; Garbarini et al., 2013) .
RHI experiments on healthy subjects typically demonstrate robust proprioceptive drifts that have been considered a strong behavioral proxy to embodiment (Botvinick and Cohen, 1998) . Interestingly however, healthy subjects may not only report the drift when they are asked to judge the position of the finger that has just been stroked, but also report the misallocation of an adjacent finger (Tsakiris and Haggard, 2005) . Thus, although tactile information is very important in terms of inducing the drift, topdown modulations of bodily representations may also influence this component of RHI. In line with this, it has been suggested that the drift occurs only when the observed rubber hand is congruent in terms of posture and identity with the participants unseen hand (Tsakiris and Haggard, 2005) . Measurements of the perceived localization of the participants hand before and after the various different stimulation conditions indicate that, unlike the healthy controls, the SCI subjects did not show any proprioceptive drift. This result is different from what was reported in a previous study where the perceived localization of the body in space, as indicated by the drift, was maximal in SCI patients with defective tactile sensations in the stimulated hand (Lenggenhager et al., 2012) . While no ready explanation for this somewhat paradoxical result is currently available, one may hypothesize that the relative somatosensory impairment of the fingers stimulated in the Lenggenhager et al. (2012) study makes the resulting, noisy stimulation more salient. It is worth noting however, that the two studies cannot be easily compared. There is a clear difference between the two paradigms related to the position of rubber hand relative to real hand which was vertical in the present study, while horizontal in Lenggenhager et al. (2012) . Moreover, the criterion used for detecting drift is here more conservative. Finally, the clinical severity of the Tetraplegics group seems to be greater in the present study. At any rate, a tentative explanation for the absence of drift found in the present study is related to the notion that, under physiological conditions, the stable representation of bodily self is dynamically updated by incoming sensory-motor information (Head and Holmes, 1911) . Thus, we posit that in SCI subjects the interruption of the somatic body-brain connections may induce a bias toward a predominance of the top-down (e.g., mere sight of the rubber hand) over the bottom-up processes (e.g., tactile information from the real hand).
The debate about the processes underlying the RHI is still very vigorous. While the illusion was originally thought to be an effect of the dominant role of vision in intermodal integration (Botvinick and Cohen, 1998) , subsequent studies suggested that it may be induced by other objects than a fake hand and thus stem from a bottom-up Bayesian perceptual learning process rather than from a process of embodiment and change in body self-representation (Armel and Ramachandran, 2003) (but see Tsakiris and Haggard, 2005) . In addition, a recent study demonstrates that the RHI can be induced by the mere observation of an object approaching the rubber hand but without touching it (Ferri et al., 2013) . Studies on healthy subjects suggest that the two RHI components indicating ownership of an artificial hand and the illusory perception of the body in space (hand drift) do not go hand in hand (Rohde et al., 2011) . Our data on SCI subjects provide further evidence of this dissociation between these two components of the RHI. In particular, we posit that the illusory ownership as assessed by the questionnaire may be related to mainly visual, top-down modulation while the proprioceptive drift may be based on bottom-up information processing. Thus, while post-deprivation neural plasticity may amplify illusory ownership in SCI subjects, the lack of afference and bottom-up information may cause lack of drift.
Although the RHI is largely used as a direct index of bodyownership, studies demonstrate an elevated inter-individual variability in the effect (Haans et al., 2012) as well as a partial independency from bodily awareness (David et al., 2013) . Moreover, the fact that the mere sight of the rubber hand triggers the RHI more than the tactile sensation does (Pavani et al., 2000; Aimola Davies et al., 2010) might suggest that personal variables, such as suggestibility, play a role in the phenomenon beyond neuroplasticity. However, no relationship between the indices of RHI and the results of the personality and susceptibility tests was found in our sample, suggesting that studies with a larger sample are necessary to demonstrate whether the absence of evidence really means that this relationship does not exist. In a previous study on SCI subjects (Pernigo et al., 2012) , we demonstrated that practicing sport was useful in terms of strengthening the visual representation of upper limb body parts and contrasting the effects of somatosensory and motor deprivation. As a result we reasoned that in this study the degree of functional autonomy (which is mainly linked to the extent of the lesion) might influence the effects of the RHI. However, no correlation between these two variables was found. While this negative result may suggest that the visual perception of other people's bodies and RHI are largely independent phenomena, further study on this issue is necessary to explore the link between RHI and somatosensory and motor deprivation. Further insights about face-hand remapping may be revealed by the stroking of different body parts.
At the end of each experiment we asked to the participants if they felt any particular sensation that was not captured by the questionnaires or if they had any additional comments. Normally no sensations and no comments were referred, except in three cases. One tetraplegic participant (T6) reported that in the middle of the Face Synchronous condition he started to feel the touch on the hand that was usually insensible to touch since his spinal cord lesion, 30 years earlier. At the end of the experiment he tried to touch the rubber hand with his own right hand to test whether he could feel the touch again. Unfortunately he couldnt.
Another tetraplegic participant (T5) reported that, starting from the first hand condition, every time we touched the rubber hand with the Q-tip, he felt a light pain sensation at his own hand, that he located at the rubber hand position and not at the real hand position. His real hand was insensible since the traumatic lesion of the spinal cord, 13 years earlier.
A paraplegic participant (P14), reported that, during the Face conditions, the mere vision of the rubber hand was strong enough to feel the embodiment sensation, but the tactile stimulation at the left cheek interrupted this illusion.
The subjective report of T6 seems in line with our result that in Tetraplegics also facial stimulation can evoke ownership illusion, while T5 shows the presence of illusion in both the synchronous and asynchronous Hand conditions. The participant P14, instead, suggests that, in some people, mere vision of the Rubber Hand may cause the illusion, interrupted by the tactile stimulation, similarly to what was observed by Rohde et al. (2011) .
Some possible limitations of this study deserve discussion. The variety of the NLI levels and in the time interval between the lesion onset and the experimental session in both the Tetraplegics and Paraplegics groups are relevant. These differences imply each individual in the same group does differ in motor, tactile and proprioceptive functions that surely have effects on neuroplastic somatosensory and motor cortical changes. For example, a person affected by paraplegia, with a T1 NLI has dramatically less control of his/her own trunk than people with a L4 lesion. These differences are even more striking in the Tetraplegics group, where a difference among C4, C5, and C6 greatly impact in the possibility of arm movements, from the complete paralysis to the possibility of motion and use of tools. It is also worth noting that more chronic SCI subjects could have learned a higher number functional strategies than a less chronic SCI subject. This should have neuroplastic consequences. Furthermore, even if there are not statistically significant differences between groups, the fact that some Tetraplegics could feel the tactile sensation of the Q-tip in the hand, while other participants could not feel it, probably have some influence on the results of this study. Finally it was not possible to have the MRI scans before and after the SCI thus our suggestions regarding the influence of lesion onset, tactile sensitivity and neuroplastic changes remain speculative.
However, finding significant effects in spite of the above reported characteristics of heterogeneity could be an indication of robustness of the effects themselves, thus our results are in keeping with the typical neuroplastic changes following SCI reported in previous literature (Bruehlmeier et al., 1998; Freund et al., 2011a,b) and seem to support the notion that motor and sensory representation of spared body parts shift toward the areas contiguous with de-efferented and de-afferented body parts.
This study has demonstrated that indices of ownership of a fake hand can be induced in SCI subjects and that the indication od illusory ownership over the rubber hand is more likely to occur in the presence of upper spinal levels and thus involves greater de-afferentation. In Tetraplegics the phenomenon is also induced by facial stimulation suggesting that deprivation related plasticity may occur according to somatotopic rules. Further studies are needed to understand whether plastic changes following SCI are inherently adaptive or maladaptive (Kokotilo et al., 2009; Nishimura and Isa, 2009 ). The absence of changes in the perceived position of the body in space confirms that these two components of the RHI may be more dissociated in SCI subjects than in healthy individuals (Rohde et al., 2011) .
The population in the UK is growing older. In 1951, those aged 85 yr and more constituted only 1.6% of the population, in 2003 this had risen to 5.5%, and by 2031 it is predicted to grow to 7.9%.
1 This ageing population is consuming increasing amounts of healthcare resources, with the number of elderly patients admitted to intensive care (ICU) growing progressively. 2 In the USA, more than half of all intensive care days are incurred by patients older than 65 yr of age. 3 Recent attempts at healthcare cost containment have fuelled discussions on rationing, using age as a discriminator. 4 Whether or not rationing based on age becomes explicit, age is already having a negative impact on the decision to admit to ICU. 5 -7 Justification for this is based on the physiological decline and the increase in co-morbidities seen with age. The incorrect assumption from these observations is that the chances of survival from a serious illness in the elderly are unlikely: outcome studies examining this suggest that age is not a good predictor of outcome on ICU. 8 -11 In this study, we sought to identify other factors taken from the first 48 h on ICU which would predict length of stay and mortality in the very elderly.
UK between April 1, 1998 and March 2003. The Royal United Hospital serves a population of 550 000 people and has an 11-bedded ICU. The ICU admits levels 2 and 3 patients (level 2 patients require close observation or support for a single failing organ system and include those stepping down from level 3; level 3 patients require advanced respiratory support or basic respiratory support plus support for two other organ systems). 12 All patients admitted to the ICU had their variables entered into a clinical database from which data were incorporated into the national case mix programme database coordinated by the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre. The target population for this study was patients more than 80 yr of age admitted to the ICU after a surgical procedure. Written consent and formal ethics committee approval were required as suggested by the chair of the committee.
We identified all patients aged 80 yr or more, who had been admitted to the ICU after a recent surgical procedure. The following data were then recorded for each patient: age, gender, nature of surgical procedure, urgency of surgery, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation 2 (APACHE II) score, requirement for ventilation or i.v. vasoactive drugs in the first 24 h, and in the second 24 h on the ICU, survival status at ICU, and hospital discharge. The database was carefully reviewed and, where necessary, supplemental data were extracted from an operating theatre database and patients' paper records. For this study, patients undergoing elective or scheduled operations, as defined by the National Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Deaths, were categorized as elective and those undergoing urgent or emergency operations were categorized as emergency.
Patients were recorded as 'receiving i.v. vasoactive drugs in their first and second 24 h period' if they received any vasoactive drug [defined as inotropes (e.g. dobutamine) or vasopressors (e.g. noradrenaline)] by infusion at any point during their first or second 24 h, respectively. Patients were recorded as 'receiving ventilation in their first and second 24 h period', if they received any intermittent positive pressure ventilation (including mandatory or assisted modes) via a tracheal tube or trachoestomy at any point during their first or second 24 h, respectively. Patients readmitted to the ICU had only their first admission data used for the APACHE II score and their admissions amalgamated for length of stay and survival. Patients who stayed on the ICU for less than 0.2 days and who did not generate an APACHE II score were not included.
The primary outcome of the study was hospital mortality; secondary outcomes included ICU mortality and lengths of stay for hospital and ICU. ICU mortality was defined as survival of a patient at ultimate discharge from the ICU and hospital mortality was defined as survival at discharge or transfer from our hospital.
All data were analysed using Stata Statistical software (version 9.1, # Statacorp). Continuous data were summarized using mean (SD) and medians (IQR). Univariable analysis using logistic regression was used to identify statistically significant prognostic covariates associated with hospital mortality and ICU length of stay (length of stay was divided above and below 3 days and the analysis conducted only on ICU survivors). The crude odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were adjusted for potential confounding variables: gender, age, and severity of illness (measured using the APACHE II score). A further multivariable model was used to identify independent predictors of hospital mortality. All covariates found to be significant in the univariable analysis were included except APACHE II score. For each subgroup, multivariable analysis was performed twice, for the first 24 h of an admission (i.e. all patients) and secondly for those surviving into the second 24 h of an ICU admission. For length of stay, covariates with an odds ratio ,1 imply a trend towards a stay ,3 days on the ICU. Conversely for hospital mortality, covariates with an odds ratio .1 imply an increased chance of dying. For both univariable and multivariable analysis, differences were considered significant at P,0.05.
During the study period, 275 patients more than 80 yr of age were identified as being admitted to the ICU after surgery. This represented 8.8% of all admissions during the 5 yr period. Eleven patients were excluded for being on the ICU for less than 0.2 days and did not generate an APACHE II score and nine admissions were recognized as being readmissions. Therefore, 255 patients were submitted for further analysis. The characteristics of the study population are summarized in Table 1 . The median age was 83.0 yr (IQR 81-86), 5.8% were more than 90 yr of age. Sixty per cent of admissions followed an emergency operation. There were 137 (53.7%) laparotomies, 54 (21.2%) For those surviving ICU (n¼203), a univariate analysis was performed against length of stay on ICU, divided into above or below 3 days. Significant predictors of a stay on ICU for more than 3 days (after adjustment for age, sex, and severity of illness) included urgency of surgery (adjOR 0.42; 95% CI, 0.21 -0.83; P¼0.01), use of ventilation on day 1 of an ICU admission (adjOR 0.41; 95% CI, 0.23 -0.83; P¼0.01), use of ventilation on day 2 of an ICU admission (adjOR 0.18; 95% CI, 0.08 -0.41; P,0.001), use of i.v. vasoactive drugs on day 1 of an ICU admission (adjOR) 0.13; 95% CI, 0.06-0.27; P,0.001), use of i.v. vasoactive drugs on day 2 of an ICU admission (adjOR 0.1; 95% CI, 0.04 -0.22; P,0.001).
A multivariate analysis using logistic regression was used to evaluate the independent role of each covariate in hospital mortality. Multivariate analysis was conducted on all patients included in the study followed by a further three subgroups: after elective surgery, emergency surgery, and emergency laparotomy. All covariates included in the univariate analysis were submitted to multivariate analysis except APACHE II score because of co-linearity with some of the other covariates. The results of the multivariate analysis are shown in Tables 2 -5 .
For all the patients in the study, those who received i.v. vasoactive drugs within the first 24 h on ICU had a 4.3-fold increased mortality (OR 4.29; 95% CI, 2.35-7.84; P,0.001).
Patients who received vasoactive drugs on day 2 had a 3.6-fold increase in mortality (OR 3.63; 95% CI, 1.58-8.37; P,0.01). Patients who received ventilation extending into the second 24 h on ICU had a two-fold increase in mortality (OR 2.1; 95% CI, 0.94-4.7), which was just outside our limit of statistical significance (P¼0.07).
After an elective operation, patients who received i.v. vasoactive drugs within the first 24 h on ICU had a 5.8-fold increase rate of death (OR 5.8; 95% CI, 1.86-18.10; P¼0.002); for those who received ventilation on the second day of ICU mortality increased 6.9-fold (OR 6.88; 95% CI, 1.5-45.06; P¼0.04).
After an emergency operation, patients who received i.v. vasoactive drugs within the first 24 h on ICU had a four-fold increased mortality rate (OR 4.06; 95% CI, 1.93 -8.53; P,0.001). Those who received vasoactive drugs on the second day of ICU had a four-fold increase in mortality (OR 3.96; 95% CI, 1.53 -10.21; P¼0.004).
Finally, after an emergency laparotomy, patients who received i.v. vasoactive drugs within the first 24 h on ICU were 3.9 times more likely to die (OR 3.85; 95% CI, 1.64 -9.02; P¼0.002). No significant prognostic factors were determined by the model on day 2.
This study has shown a consistent association between the requirement of i.v. vasoactive drugs in the first 48 h and mortality. The use of i.v. vasoactive drugs in the first two 24 h periods after admission was associated with a 3.6 to 5.8-fold increase in the likelihood of dying, depending on the urgency of the surgery. Ventilation extending into the second 24 h was generally associated with an increase in mortality and after elective operations, a 6.9-fold increase in the risk of death. Notably, the use of ventilation in the first 24 h after admission was not associated with increased mortality. Length of stay beyond 3 days was associated with urgency of surgery, use of i.v. vasoactive drugs, and ventilation in the first two 24 h periods.
Nowhere in these analyses did we find an association between increasing age and mortality. This confirms the previous studies on the critically ill elderly that age per se is not a strong predictor of death on ICU. Over the last decade, there has been increasing numbers of studies focusing on the outcome of the elderly admitted to ICU. Mortality rates have been found to be high. However, many studies have shown that the severity of illness rather than age itself is the strongest predictor of death. Chelluri and colleagues made a comparison between 54 patients aged 75 yr and older and 43 patients aged between 65 and 74 yr admitted to a mixed ICU. Long-term survival was similar between the two age groups but differed significantly between those with low and those with high APACHE II scores. 8 Another similar study by Wu and colleagues compared 130 patients aged 75 yr and older and those aged between 55 and 65 yr, admitted over a 30 month period to a medical ICU. Using logistic regression, the risk of dying was associated with a modified APACHE II score; increased age did not predict mortality. 9 A longitudinal study conducted by Kass and colleagues followed patients over the age of 85 yr admitted to a mixed ICU. In that study, age was not associated with mortality, instead severity of illness determined by the number of organs failing was significantly associated with outcome at: ICU discharge, 30 day post-hospital discharge, and 1 yr. In patients with more than two organ system failure, there was 100% mortality at 1 yr. 10 Severity of illness predicting death more accurately than age applies also to subgroups of patients on ICU. Shabot and colleagues evaluated 1039 trauma patients admitted to a surgical ICU, of which 9.5% were more than 65 yr of age. Age was a poor determinant of survival whereas Injury Severity Score (ISS), Trauma Score (TS), and the Simplified Acute Physiology Score (SAPS) were good determinants of survival.
Few studies have concentrated specifically on the outcomes after surgery. Stephan and colleagues investigated the outcome of patients on a surgical ICU. They included 106 patients more than the age of 75 and found an ICU mortality of 31.0% and a hospital mortality of 42.4%. 13 Using a multivariate model, hospital mortality was associated with an ICU-acquired nosocomial infection, mechanical ventilation for more than 24 h, modified APACHE II score, duration of preoperative hospitalization, and underlying disease. Similarly, 140 patients more than the age of 90 were studied by Margulies and colleagues. 14 ICU mortality was found to be 4.3% and hospital mortality 17.1%. Udekwas and colleagues evaluated 672 patients aged 70 yr or older admitted to a surgical ICU. The study included 65.5% of elective cases and 50.7% of vascular surgical patients. Hospital mortality was 12.1% and was found to be associated with increasing age, severity of illness, and length of stay. 15 In patients older than 85 yr of age, Yosylius and colleagues found an ICU and hospital mortality of 29% and 45%, respectively. Although this was a mixed ICU population, 73% were admitted after an operation. Independent factors associated with mortality were: impaired level of consciousness, infection on admission, ICU-acquired infection, and severity of illness. 16 The gross variations in survival between the studies are explained by their heterogeneity. The studies differed in age criteria, severity of illness, types of operations, and country of origin.
Our study has limitations. First, it is an observational study and therefore there is potential error from unmeasured confounding factors. Secondly, it is assumed in our study that patients who received vasoactive drugs or ventilation 'required it'. As this study is retrospective, the study can have had no influence on decisions to use these interventions and it is likely that the decision to use or not use these interventions is similar in both groups. Thirdly, our subgroup analysis is inevitably of smaller groups and fewer variables appear significantly associated with poorer outcome. Larger studies of these subgroups may be indicated. Lastly, the sickest patients may be subject to a self-fulfilling prophecy in that treatment is withdrawn before the full duration of the disease process. We did not measure the number of patients who had their treatment withdrawn before death. However, our results suggest that increased intervention (rather than withdrawal of such treatment) on days 1 and 2 after admission is associated with increased length of stay and mortality. The strength of the study lies in the external validation. The Royal United Hospital is a large general hospital and performs general surgical, orthopaedic, vascular, urological, and gynaecological operations. Similar cohorts of patients are admitted to many other hospitals across the UK.
In conclusion, this study found that for patients aged 80 and more, admitted to ICU after surgery the strongest association with mortality was the use of i.v. vasoactive drugs during both of their first 2 days on ICU. Length of stay on ICU increased after emergency surgery and in patients who received i.v. vasoactive drugs and ventilation on both the first and second days of admission. After elective operations, ventilation beyond the first 24 h was also a significant predictor of death. 
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common disease in older men with age of more than 50 years. [1] BPH is characterized by the enlargement of the prostate and clinically associated with lower urinary tract symptoms. Although BPH is not a lifethreatening disease, it has been a health concern and significantly affected the life quality of patients. [2] The current therapies for BPH mainly include transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) and open prostatectomy. [3] However, the TURP is commonly associated with adverse events in patients following surgery, thus the adjuvant therapy options for preventing the complications are urgently needed.
Continuous bladder irrigation (CBI) is a supplementary approach for BPH management after surgery with a view to preventing clot retention, cystospasm, and hemorrhage postoperatively. [4] Besides, CBI has been proposed to inhibit the hemorrhagic cystitis [5] and increase the survival rate following stem cell transplantation. [6] Although CBI is widely used for preventing the complications following TURP, it is not easy for nurses to take CBI for patients. [7] Nurses are responsible for ensuring a continuous flow of prescribed solution during the whole procedure. Thus, it is imperative to assess the blocked catheter by checking the color of drainage bag and controlling the flow rate. [7] Currently, the flow rate of irrigation fluid is controlled manually by nurse according to the color of drainage fluid. Inappropriate flow rate may result in adverse effects such as clot retention, cystospasm, and hemorrhage. However, research references of the manual to control the flow rate are rare. In order to achieve a better control of flow rate of irrigation fluid and reduce inappropriate flow rate-related adverse effects, we designed the automatic flow rate controller for bladder irrigation applied with wireless sensor and evaluated its clinical efficacy for patients after TURP. We expect that our study would provide therapeutic implication for patients undergoing CBI.

Between July 2013 and July 2014, a total of 146 patients with BPH who were admitted in the urology department of our hospital were included in our study. All the patients underwent TURP and then were subjected to CBI. The age of the included patients ranged from 58 to 80 years, and the prostate volume was less than 80 mL based on transrectal ultrasonography. Patients with coagulation disorders, infectious, cardiovascular, and cerebrovascular diseases were excluded from this study. Magnetic resonance and needle puncture were conducted to exclude patients with prostatic cancer.
The included patients were randomly divided into experimental and control groups based on the odevity of admission number. Patients in the control group received conventional bladder irrigation with 0.9% saline solution. Those patients in the experimental group were irrigated with automatic regulating device applied with wireless sensor. All the patients or their parents provided informed consent before the study. Approval was obtained from the ethics committee of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University.
The bladder irrigation was performed for patients in the control group at conventional irrigation rate. The irrigation rate was initially managed at 150 dpm within 2 hours postoperatively. At 2 to 8 hours after operation, the elution drop rate was maintained at 120 dpm. The irrigation rate was then adjusted within 30 dpm based on the color of drainage solution. When the flushing fluid was clear or showed reddish color, the bladder irrigation was stopped.
In the experimental group, the flow rate of bladder irrigation was controlled using the automatic regulating device. The apparatus of automatic bladder irrigation applied with wireless sensor system was composed of 3 modules, including color monitor for drainage solution, flushing fluid rate adjusting controller, and computer microprocessor (Fig. 1) . After TURP, patients were placed in regular hospital beds. The color monitor was mounted on evacuating catheter, and the irrigation adjusting controller was installed in Murphy dropper of flushing line. The light signals for the color change were captured by light/frequency sensor and analyzed by computer microprocessor to automatically adjust irrigation rate (Fig. 1) . The system parameters were set by experts according to the individual patient's condition.
All the patients were followed up until hospital discharge. During the process of bladder irrigation, the irrigation fluid amount and the time of duration were recorded. Clot retention and cystospasm in patients were observed. Besides, the hospital stays of patients were calculated after leaving hospital.
The statistical analysis was performed by SPSS 16.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). All the data were displayed by mean ± SD (standard deviation). Measurement data were analyzed by Student t test, and the enumeration data were analyzed by chisquare test. P < 0.05 was considered to be significantly different.
A total of 146 patients with the mean age of 70.1 years were randomly assigned to experimental (n = 76) and control groups (n = 70). In the control group, there were 68 Han Chinese people and 2 other ethnic people. The patients in the experimental group included 73 Han and 3 other ethnic people. The number of patients with ages ranging from 50 to 70 years was 32 in the control group and 29 in the experimental group. The groups were not significantly different with regard to age, ethnic history, family income, length of illness, BMI, international prostate symptom score, prostate volume, surgery time, and preoperative indwelling catheter (P > 0.05, Table 1 ).
As shown in Table 2 , the mean amount of irrigation fluid usage in the experimental group (24.2 ± 3.8 L) was significantly lower than that in the control group (54.6 ± 5.4 L) (P < 0.05). The irrigation duration of patients was not significantly different between the experimental and the control groups (28.6 ± 2.7 hours; 29.5 ± 3.4 hours, P > 0.05). The bladder irrigation with 
Medicine automatic regulating device significantly decreased the incidence of clot retention (8/76) and cystospasm (12/76) in patients of the experimental group compared with the controls (21/70; 39/70, P < 0.05). In addition, the patients in the experimental group had significantly shorter hospital stays (5.4 ± 1.2 days) than the controls (5.9 ± 1.9 days) (P < 0.05).
Currently, the automatic regulatory device for regulating the irrigation fluid of CBI has been less reported. In this paper, as far as we know, we reported a novel automatic CBI apparatus for the first time and tested its clinical efficacy in patients after TURP. The study found that the novel device was safer and more effective than the traditional irrigation method. The application of this device might improve the clinical outcome of patients and promote the recovery of patients. We anticipate that the application of this device will provide valuable insights into the improvements of outcome in patients after TURP. Our data showed that the incidence rate of clot retention and cystospasm in patients irrigated with automatic regulation device was lower than that in patients with traditional method. It suggests that the automatic regulatory device leads to less-adverse effects and is safer than the traditional method. With regard to the reasons for the difference, in the control group, the flow rate of irrigation fluid is regulated by medical care personnel according to subjective judgment. It is reported that the color recognition for drainage fluid varies for individuals, which leads to incorrect flow rate regulation. [8] Even the color of drainage fluid is observed frequently, the transient changes of color cannot be captured by nurses, which may increase the risk for blood clots formation, cystospasm, and clot retention. In contrast, in the experiment group, the patients were treated with the automatic regulatory device, and the automatic bladder irrigation system was capable to detect the color change timely. In order to realize the quantitative relation between color and flow rate, different stages of color were labeled with flow rate in the computer microprocessor. Therefore, the flow rate was regulated objectively and accurately.
In addition, our results showed that mean irrigation volume in the experimental group (24.2 ± 3.8 L) was significantly lower than that in the control group (54.6 ± 5.4 L) (P < 0.05). This observation might be due to the fact that with the traditional bladder irrigation, the flow rate was regulated at liberty based on subjective experience. Based on the clinical experience, the medical care personnel or patients' family members are inclined to regulate the flow rate faster than theory value, which may increase the irrigation volume. However, fast flow rate cannot prevent the complications of bladder irrigation. The automatic bladder irrigation system was characterized by accurate control, real-time monitor, and automatic adjustment. Therefore, in the experimental group, the flow rate was regulated accurately. Moreover, there were no significant differences with regard to irrigation time and hospital stay between the 2 groups, which suggests that the novel irrigation system does not lengthen the time of irrigation and hospital stays of patients.
In recent years, although color chart has been designed for controlling the flow rate of bladder irrigation, the flow rate is adjusted manually, [7] which may lead to blood clots formation and retention following irrigation. In this paper, novel automatic regulatory device for CBI based on wireless sensor was designed. The red-green-blue color/frequency sensor module was applied, which consisted of white light source, transparency window, transparency window, and wireless communication part. The output frequency of color/frequency sensor showed linear relation with light intensity. The color data of the drainage solution in the catheter were processed by 32-bit ADuC7026 microprocessor, and the flow regulation was conducted by stepping motor driving by general-purpose input/output. The whole process involved digital data process and digitization, which enhanced the accuracy. Besides, compared with traditional CBI, the color changes of the drainage solution were monitored in the pipe in real time, which also contributed to the accuracy. The study also has some limitations. First, it has a limited sample size. Second, the follow-up is not long enough. A larger number of patients with a longer follow-up are necessary to test the maintenance of clinical efficacy of this automatic bladder irrigation device before its wide application in clinical practice.
In conclusion, the automatic bladder irrigation device promotes digitization of drainage color and controls the flow rate in a standardized manner. Compared with the traditional bladder irrigation, the novel automatic bladder irrigation decreased the incidence of complications following irrigation.
The study suggests that it is a safe and effective method for patients after TURP. Our work provides novel insights into flow rate regulation of bladder irrigation.
Mouse Del1 is an ECM protein secreted by embryonic endothelial cells and hypertrophic chondrocytes [1] . Del1 consists of five domains: three epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeat domains (E1, E2, E3) and two Discoidin domains (C1, C2). Work from my laboratory recently showed that the C-termini of the C1 domains are essential for organization of Del1 into the ECM and that both the E3 repeat domain and the N-terminus of the C1 domain play supportive roles in organization into the ECM [2] . We termed this portion of the C1 domain the Del1 deposition domain (DDD). Fusion proteins that include the DDD and an alkaline phosphatase protein as a marker accumulate in the ECM without interfering with enzyme activity of the alkaline phosphatase.
In some therapeutic treatments, localization of bioactive molecules specifically to the target tissue(s) increases the concentration of bioactive molecules in the target cells. This results in higher efficiency of treatment and because the concentration of the bioactive molecules in non-target tissues is minimized, this can also result in a lower incidence of treatment side effects. The purpose of this study is to ask if addition of DDD to an enzyme can result in localization of that enzyme to the ECM without affecting activity of the enzyme. Because the space between a cell and the ECM is not a simple vacancy, it is important to ask if a fusion protein derived from an enzyme is functional in the microenvironment of the ECM.
To address this, I designed a cell-based system in which it is possible to readily monitor both an enzyme and the enzymatic products it produces. LNCap cells are prostatic cancer-derived cells that grow in an androgendependent manner and these cells were used as a model target cell in this study [3, 4] . DDD was used to immobilize 3a-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3aHD), which intracellularly catalyzes the conversion of aldehydes and ketones to alcohols, and converts DHT to 5a-androstane-3a-, 17b-diol physiologically [5] . In this study, recombinant 3aHD proteins were secreted extracellularly as a result of addition of a signal sequence at the Nterminus of the recombinant protein (Fig. 1a, b) . The addition of a DDD to the 3aHD protein successfully localized the protein to the ECM. Moreover, the 3aHD in ECM was biochemically active and suppressed growth of LNCap cells.
Cell culture and evaluation of cell growth LNCap (CRL-1740) and Cos-7 (CRL-1651) cells were purchased from ATCC and grown in a-minimum essential medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen) at 37°C in an atmosphere containing 5% CO 2 . To evaluate dependency of cell growth on DHT, 50% confluent LNCap cells were prepared in a 24 well plate with 300 ll of a serum free medium, VP-SFM (Invitrogen) and different concentrations of DHT (Wako, Osaka, Japan) were added. After 4 days of culture, 30 ll of WST-1 (Takara, Outs, Japan) were added to the medium, incubated for 1 hour, and the absorbance at 405 nm was measured. The experiment was repeated three times and representative data are shown.
First, a synthetic oligonucleotide encoding the signal peptide from Del1 (MKHLVAAWLLVGLSLGVPQFGKGDI) was obtained and cloned into pcDNA3D (Invitrogen) resulting in pcDNA3S. Next, a cDNA fragment encoding the human 3aHD gene (AB178898) was amplified by reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) using the forward primer, 5 0 -AAGAATTCATGAACTCCAAATGTCATTG TGTCAT and the reverse primer 5 0 -AAGATATCGT ATTCATCCAAAAATGGCCAATTAG. The amplified fragment was cloned into the 3 0 end of the signal peptide, resulting in p3aHD (Fig. 1a) . Finally, a fragment encoding the DDD (amino acids 122-316 of Del1) was amplified with the forward primer 5 0 -AAGATATCTGTGAAG CTGAGCCTTGCAGAAAT and the reverse primer 5 0 -A ACTCGAGCATGTCCATGTTGAGTGTTCTGAA. This was cloned into the 3 0 end of the 3aHD gene, resulting in the plasmid p3aHD:DDD (Fig. 1a) . The recombinant proteins expressed by these constructs also had a V5 epitope tag at their C terminal ends.
ECM samples for immunoblotting analysis were prepared according to Hidai et al. [2] . Briefly, Cos-7 cells in six-well plate were transfected with pcDNA3S, p3aHD or p3aHD:DDD using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). After 96 h of culture, conditioned medium was harvested. Then, cells were induced to detach by treatment of EDTA and the remaining ECM was collected with a scraper. The conditioned medium, cells, and ECM were fixed with 10% trichloracetic acid (Wako). The protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to a PVDF membrane (ATTO, Tokyo, Japan). The membrane was incubated with anti-V5 antibody (Invitrogen), followed by incubation with a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody, and immunoreactive proteins were detected using the ECL Advance Western Blotting Detection Kit (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ).
LNCap cells were plated to 50% confluency in a 24-well dish and transfected with 1 lg of pcDNA3S, p3aHD, or p3aHD:DDD using Lipofectamine2000. To test if an excess of p3aHD was introduced, cell growth was monitored after introduction of various amount of p3aHD. To monitor transfection efficiency, 0.1 lg of cDNA for the LacZ gene was co-transfected with each test construct. Expression of LacZ gene was monitored by measuring bgalactosidase enzyme activity using an assay system (Promega, Madison, WI). Cell number was evaluated with WST-1. The values obtained in samples transected with the control plasmid, pcDNA3S, were normalized to 1. The experiment was repeated three times and representative data are shown.
Assays of conditioned ECM ECM conditioned with 3aHD was prepared according to Hidai et al. [2] . Briefly, Cos-7 cells were cultured in a 24-well dish and transfected with 1 lg of pcDNA3S, p3aHD, or p3aHD:DDD using Lipofectamine2000. To standardize transfection efficiency, 0.1 lg of LacZ cDNA were cotransfected. Four days later, the cells were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and incubated in PBS containing 10 mM EDTA and a protease inhibitor cocktail (PIERCE, Rockford, IL) for 12 h at 48C. Next, cells were harvested by vigorous pipetting, collected by centrifugation, resuspended in 100 ll of tris buffered saline (TBS), and lysed by sonication. b-Galactosidase activity of the cell lysates was then assayed. Next, 1 9 10 4 LNCap cells were plated on the conditioned ECM, cultured for seven days, and evaluated with WST-1. To ask if exogenous DHT could rescue the growth of LNCap cells, various amounts of DHT (Wako) were added to the medium. The values obtained for samples transfected with the control plasmid, pcDNA3S, were normalized to 1. The experiment was repeated three times and representative data are shown.
Measurement of dihydrotestosterone levels ECM conditioned with 3aHD was prepared as described above. Serum obtained from a male volunteer as approved by Nihon University ethics committee was incubated with conditioned ECM in the presence of a protease inhibitor cocktail (PIERCE) for 96 h. The concentration of dihydrotestosterone in the serum was measured using the Dihydrotestosterone ELISA kit (IBL, Hamburg, Germany) according to the manufacture's protocol. The values obtained for samples transfected with the control plasmid, pcDNA3S, were normalized to 1. The experiment was repeated three times and representative data are shown.
Results were expressed as mean ± SEM. Dunn's tests or a Wilcoxon's test were performed, and statistical significance was set at P \ 0.01.
To confirm characteristics of LNCap cells, the cells were cultured in serum-free medium with various concentrations of DHT. As previously reported [3, 4] , growth of LNCap cells was dose-dependently accelerated by addition of exogenous DHT (Fig. 2a) . Next, the distribution of recombinant proteins in cells, ECM and medium was examined. Cells transfected with the control plasmid pcDNA3S, which encodes only a signal peptide (too small to be detected by SDS-PAGE as shown in Fig. 2b) , were used as a negative control. The expected sizes of the recombinant proteins encoded by p3aHD and p3aHD:DDD were 43 kDa and 65 kDa, respectively (Fig. 2b) . The recombinant protein encoded by p3aHD was not detected in ECM samples but was detected in conditioned medium and in cells. The recombinant protein encoded by p3aHD:DDD was localized to the ECM as expected for a DDD-containing polypeptide. The results also show that the total amount of 3aHD:DDD present in the culture medium was greater than the total amount found in the ECM. However, considering that the volume of medium was much larger than the volume of ECM tested, the concentration of 3aHD:DDD was much higher in ECM than in medium. Thus, it appears that the recombinant protein was concentrated in the ECM by the presence of the DDD.
To ask if recombinant proteins with 3aHD affect growth of LNCap cells, plasmids encoding various 3aHD-derived constructs were transfected into LNCap cells. Transfection with p3aHD or p3aHD:DDD resulted in reduction of cell growth at day 6 (Fig. 3a) . To check that transfection efficiency did not vary grossly, transfection efficiency was monitored by assaying b-galactosidase activity after cotransfection with a LacZ construct. Transfection of p3aHD:DDD seemed to be more effective than that of p3aHD (Fig. 3a) . In this study, it was unfortunately impossible to standardize protein levels. Strictly speaking, our results cannot address if DDD improves the efficiency or effects of an enzyme by concentrating it in the ECM, as would be relevant to therapeutics [6] . The question may be resolved in an in vivo study, wherein not only the distribution but also the effects and side effects of the recombinant proteins could be evaluated.
To determine if there is a dose-dependent relationship between cell growth and the amount of p3aHD DNA transfected into cells, the effect of transfection with different amounts of p3aHD DNA was tested (Fig. 3b) . The effect on cell growth was dependent on the amount of p3aHD added, suggesting that suppression of cell growth was not due to experimental procedures but instead, is the result of 3aHD-specific effects.
DHT may be catabolized in cells transfected with the 3aHD construct; thus, I next assayed if a growth suppression effect is induced by ECM conditioned with p3aHD:DDD (Fig. 4a) . To again check that the transfection efficiency did not vary grossly, transfection efficiency was monitored by assaying b-galactosidase activity.
Growth of cells on ECM conditioned by cells transfected with p3aHD was not different from growth on control ECM. However, ECM conditioned by cells transfected with p3aHD:DDD significantly suppressed the growth of otherwise untreated LNCap cells.
On explanation for the effect observed in this work is that the presence of 3aHD in the ECM decreases the concentration of DHT in serum. To test this, serum was incubated with conditioned ECM and the concentration of DHT was measured in treated and untreated samples (Fig. 4b) . After 96 h, the concentration of DHT in serum incubated with ECM conditioned with p3aHD:DDD had significantly decreased.
To confirm that the p3aHD:DDD suppresses the growth of LNCap cells via a decrease of DHT in medium, the ability of exogenously added DHT to reverse the effect was assayed (Fig. 4c) . Administration of exogenous DHT was In a previous study, it was found that alkaline phosphatase protein was efficiently deposited in the ECM in vitro and in vivo [2] . The present study suggests that DDD can fix enzymes in the ECM in a functional state, suggesting some biomedical applications for DDD fusion proteins. In cytotherapy, for example, cells could be preengineered with a cDNA encoding a specific DDD fusion protein. Because DDD has been reported to be effective for targeting to ECMs from various kinds of cells, one can predict that cell choice may be dictated solely according to need and that the ECM conditioned by the cells can then serve as a source of active enzyme.
Similarly, a system involving a DDD fusion protein under the control of a tissue-specific promoter could efficiently localize an exogenous protein useful in gene therapy and thus presumably, target the effects of that enzyme to a specific cell type and/or location. This has promise for generating regions of high local concentration while at the same time, resulting in only a low systemic concentration of the therapeutic proteins by virtue of their deposition in ECM. To apply the idea further, one can imagine that chemicals capable of being activated by an enzyme may then by activated in a limited region, such as in a specific target tissue or cell type, via expression of an ECM-anchored version of the activating enzyme.
In addition to enzymes, some ligands, such as the FAS ligand, might be used as partners of DDD and the system adapted to other applications [7] . That is, the presence of a cytotoxic ligand may limit the number of cells that can produce the ligand but if that ligand is in the ECM via anchoring by DDD, the ligand may remain active and accessible in the ECM even after death of the cell that initially expressed it. If this type of fusion between DDD and cytotoxic ligands results in a protein that is fixed in the ECM and significantly active, then one can imagine development of additional applications for the system.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. Fig. 4 The effects of 3aHD localized to ECM by DDD. a The ECM conditioned with p3aHD:DDD suppressed the growth of LNCap cells. LacZ was co-transfected and b-gal activity was assayed as a measure of transfection efficiency. b Concentration of DHT in serum incubated with p3aHD:DDD conditioned ECM as measured by ELISA. c Addition of exogenous DHT restored LNCap cell growth normally suppressed by ECM conditioned with p3aHD:DDD. The results represent mean ± SEM (n = 6). **P \ 0.01
Leptospirosis is a zoonotic bacterial disease that occurs in diverse epidemiological settings but imparts its greatest burden on resource-poor populations [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] . The disease has a broad geographical distribution due to the large spectrum of mammalian hosts that harbour and excrete the spirochete agent from their renal tubules [1, 3, 7] . Leptospirosis affects risk groups that are exposed to animal reservoirs or contaminated environments, such as abattoir and sewage workers, military personnel, and individuals partaking in water sports and recreation [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] . However, leptospirosis has a broader health impact as a disease of impoverished subsistence farmers [13] [14] [15] , cash croppers, and pastoralists [16] from tropical regions.
Furthermore, leptospirosis has emerged as a health threat in new settings due the influence of globalization and climate. Disasters and extreme weather events are now recognized to precipitate epidemics [6] . The emergence of leptospirosis in Thailand [17] and Sri Lanka [18] highlight the potential for the disease to rapidly spread and cause large unexplained nationwide outbreaks. Finally, the expansion of urban slums worldwide has created conditions for ratborne transmission [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] . Urban epidemics are reported in cities throughout the developing world [6, 19, 25] and will likely intensify as the world's slum population doubles to two billion by 2030 [26] .
The major burden attributed to leptospirosis has been its severe life-threatening manifestations. Leptospirosis has emerged as an important cause of pulmonary haemorrhage syndrome [27] [28] [29] [30] and acute kidney injury due to Weil's disease [31] in many regions where transmission is endemic. Case fatality for pulmonary haemorrhage syndrome and Weil's disease is more than 10% and 70% respectively [14] . In addition, leptospirosis is increasingly recognized as an important cause of undifferentiated fever [16, [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] . The majority of leptospirosis patients are not recognized or misdiagnosed as malaria [16] , dengue [39] [40] [41] , and other causes of an acute febrile illness. The lack of an adequate diagnostic test [42, 43] has further contributed to underreporting of cases [44, 45] , as well as deaths [39] . Underestimation of the morbidity and mortality due to leptospirosis is therefore common [44] and has directly contributed to its neglected disease status.
The lack of reliable estimates of the leptospirosis burden has hampered efforts to formulate the investment case to address key barriers, such as improved diagnostics, and identify effective prevention and control measures. Leptospirosis is amenable to One Health approaches to intervention [46] , since it is an animal health problem and a cause of economic loss in the same impoverished settings where the human disease burden is high. However, current estimates of cases and deaths rely on national surveillance data compiled from selected countries [47] . Pappas et al performed a review of reports and published literature, which identified regions with high endemicity [7] . Attempts have not been made to systematically estimate the global and regional disease burden, as has been done for other neglected diseases in the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) Study 2010 [48] . The World Health Organization (WHO) convened the Leptospirosis Epidemiology Reference Group (LERG) to guide this task [44] . Herein, we present the findings of a study that aimed to perform a systematic literature review of the data on leptospirosis morbidity and mortality, estimate the annual burden of cases and deaths, and identify GBD and WHO regions with the highest burden to inform local decision making and policy.
Methods are presented in detail in the accompanying supplementary document (S1 Protocol). The systematic literature review and quality assurance processes were developed during two consultative meetings of the LERG [49, 50] . The findings of the systematic review reported under PRISMA guidelines [51] (S1 Protocol). This independent panel of experts reviewed and provided advice on the methods and interpretation of results for the study.
The systematic review covered published reports and grey literature on leptospirosis morbidity and mortality from January 1970 to October 2008. We performed a systematic review of published literature by screening 32 electronic databases (Fig 1) , for search terms (S1 Protocol p.2), without language limitations, according to Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [51] . We defined all variables for which data were extracted (S2 Protocol). In addition, the LERG requested public health officials and researchers to provide supplementary information from published studies as well as grey literature. Studies that fulfilled the selection criteria (S1 Protocol pp. 3-5) were evaluated for methodology and study design and assigned to four quality assurance categories by two independent raters (S1 Protocol p.5, S1 and S2 Tables). For studies that met the study quality criteria (S3 Table) , we applied LERG-approved definitions (S1 Protocol p. 5) for confirmed leptospirosis cases and deaths and extracted information on crude disease incidence and case fatality ratio. The systematic review also identified case series of leptospirosis patients among the quality assured incidence studies, and extracted information on age and gender-stratified proportions of cases and deaths (S1 Protocol pp. 4-5; S5 Table) . Since standard serologic confirmation of leptospirosis requires evaluation of paired acute and convalescent-phase sera [52] , we reviewed laboratory confirmation procedures and extracted data on proportions of suspected cases that had incomplete diagnostic evaluation (S1 Protocol p. 5) and ratios of clinically-suspected to laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths (S1 Protocol p. 5, S7 Table) . Two published reports (S1 Protocol references [39] , [56] ) were each separated into two studies as they contained separate data from urban and rural populations. c 94 published and 2 grey literature studies.
We evaluated quality-assured studies for sources of heterogeneity due to study design, epidemiological setting, time, and geographic region. When multiple data sources were available for a country, mean estimates of crude country-specific morbidity were calculated, weighted by the size of the study population. Since information on mortality and case fatality was sparse (S4 Table and Fig 2) , we calculated the mean case fatality ratio using all reported data, weighted by study population, and used this estimate together with crude country-specific morbidity to calculate crude country-specific mortality (Fig 3, S10 Table, equation 7 and S1 Protocol p. 6). The majority of studies did not report age and gender-specific incidences. We therefore used the crude country-specific morbidity and mortality estimates, together with data on age and gender-specific risk for disease and death identified from case series reports (S10 Table, Tables, Fig 3 and S1 Protocol p. 5), to obtain estimates for age and gender-specific morbidity and mortality for countries and territories that had quality-assured data (S10 Table, Because data were not available for every sub-region, a multivariable regression model was developed to estimate leptospirosis incidence and mortality for each country and territory. We estimated the age and gender-specific morbidity and mortality and their 95% confidence intervals for each of 222 of the world's countries and territories, (S12 Table) based on a model that was developed with data on age and gender-specific incidences from quality-assured studies (S1 Protocol pp. [6] [7] [8] [9] . After a range of multivariable regression approaches and candidate variables were evaluated to select a country-level prediction model for age and gender-specific morbidity, we used a linear regression model approach to predict the log-transformation of annual morbidity of leptospirosis by country or territory. Annual disease incidence is represented as an exponential colour gradient from white (0-3), yellow (7) (8) (9) (10) , orange (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) to red (over 100), in cases per 100,000 population. Circles and triangles indicate the countries of origin for published and grey literature quality-assured studies, respectively. doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0003898.g002 leptospirosis morbidity based on country-specific indicator variables (S10 Table, equations 4 and 5, S9 Table and Fig 3) . This model aimed to derive estimates based on the relationship between the mean reported leptospirosis incidence and country-level characteristics such climate, sociodemographic indicators and health indicators. Variables were screened based on plausibility, availability for all countries and territories, and univariable relationship with leptospirosis incidence. The final variables in the prediction model were selected to produce the highest adjusted R 2 in order to yield the smallest prediction error: 1) whether the country is a tropical island, 2) percent urbanization of the population, 3) Distance from the equator in degrees latitude, and 4) the mean years of life expectancy at birth. Since crude mortality was calculated directly from disease incidence estimates, we used the same variables to model age and gender-specific mortality at the country level. We used a Monte Carlo model, which incorporated age and gender-specific incidence estimates and 95% CI for each country and territory as inputs, to obtain country, region, and global estimates and 95% CI of leptospirosis morbidity, mortality, cases and deaths (S10 Table  equation 6 , Fig 3 and S1 Protocol pp. 7-8). These estimates were used to create probability distributions of age and gender-specific incidence and mortality from which random samples were drawn. The ratios of clinically-suspected to laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths and their 95% CI, obtained from case series reports (Fig 3 and S10 Table equation 1) , were used to create normal distributions for the estimated under-reporting ratio for cases and deaths. A random draw from these normal distributions was multiplied by each random sample from estimated incidence and mortality distributions in order to obtain estimates adjusted for incomplete diagnostic testing (S1 Protocol p.7). Population estimates for 2010 were obtained from United Nations Population Division [53] . Morbidity and mortality estimates were calculated for both GBD [48] and WHO [54] geographical regions, described on S1 Protocol p. 2, so that these figures can be compared with information on other neglected diseases. Estimates were rounded to three significant figures, with a precision limit of 100 cases or deaths. Modelling was performed using the R statistical language [55] , and Monte Carlo simulation was performed using the Poptools plug-in for Microsoft Excel 2007 [56] . Maps were created to illustrate estimated morbidity using the rworldmap package for R [57] . Country-specific estimates of leptospirosis mortality and morbidity were shared with each country in compliance with WHO guidelines.
The search strategy and quality assessment and data extraction process yielded eight high-quality and 72 medium-quality studies, including seven grey literature studies (S3 Table and Fig 1) . Inter-evaluator agreement for the quality assessment was high (Kappa 0.93, 95% CI 0.80-1.00). The majority of studies reported data that were published after 1989 (66%) and obtained from five regions, Western Europe (n = 15; 19%), Caribbean (n = 14; 18%), South-East Asia (n = 10; 13%), Tropical Latin America (n = 10; 13%), and Oceania (n = 8; 10%). Among studies, 96% used hospital-based surveillance to identify leptospirosis cases, while 4% performed case ascertainment in community-based outpatient facilities.
Reported disease incidence ranged from 0.10 to 975.00 annual cases per 100,000 population (S3 and S8 Tables). We did not identify significant temporal trends in morbidity or mortality (considering 10-year periods), but found differences in reported morbidity and mortality based on study design and population ( Table 1 ). Studies that used active surveillance to identify leptospirosis cases reported significantly higher morbidity than passive surveillance studies (12.09 vs. 2.13 per 100 000 population, p<0.01). Morbidity was also significantly higher in studies of rural populations and tropical regions compared to urban settings.
Among the 35 studies that reported information on case fatality ratios (S3 Table) ; the mean case fatality ratio was 6.85% (95% CI 5.66-8.03). Ten studies reported age-and gender-stratified data for leptospirosis cases (listed in S5 Table) . Adults and males had a greater risk for leptospirosis than children and females (S6 Table and Fig 4A) , with highest risk (RR, 2.4, 95% CI 0.7-4.1) occurring among adult males with 20-29 years of age. Among three studies with ageand gender-stratified data for deaths from leptospirosis (S5 Table) , the age-specific risk for death was different from that for disease (S6 Table and Fig 4B) , and the highest risk for death occurred in an older age group of males with 50-59 years of age (RR, 3.7, 95% CI 2.6-4.8). Among 10 studies that reported information on the completeness of laboratory confirmation procedures, paired samples were obtained from a mean of 53% of cases (range, 20-88%). A total of 19 and four studies reported data on both clinically-suspected and laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths, respectively, due to leptospirosis (S7 Table) . Among these studies, the mean ratio of clinically-suspected to laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths was 3.1 (95% CI 1.2-5.1) and 2.2 (95% CI, 0.9-3.3), respectively.
The model selection process screened 147 candidate variables for entry in a multivariable regression model of leptospirosis morbidity (S1 Protocol pp. 6 and 7). Eight variables met statistical, plausibility, and availability screening criteria and were evaluated in multivariable Approach used to estimate global leptospirosis morbidity and mortality. We extracted information on leptospirosis disease incidence, case fatality, age and gender distribution of cases and deaths, and the ratios of clinically suspected to laboratory confirmed cases and deaths from studies that met quality assurance criteria. Data outputs are depicted in open boxes. Processes and analyses are depicted in shaded boxes. Equations are detailed in S10 Table. doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0003898.g003 Table 1 . Reported leptospirosis morbidity, mortality, and case fatality, according to study characteristic. (Tables 2, S9 and S10, equation 4). This model predicted the natural logarithm of leptospirosis morbidity based on four country-specific variables related to geography and climate (distance from the equator, location on a tropical island), indicators of the population's overall socioeconomic and health status (life expectancy at birth), and urbanization. The adjusted R 2 of the prediction model was 0.600. This model was used to estimate age and gender-specific morbidity and mortality for 222 countries. A Monte Carlo model incorporated age and gender-specific incidence and mortality at the country level to obtain country-specific, regional, and global estimates for incidence and mortality that were adjusted for incomplete diagnostic testing ( (Fig 2 and Table 3 ). Small tropical islands had high estimated incidence of leptospirosis; however, in several cases there was also significant uncertainty associated with those predictions. Morbidity and mortality by WHO sub-region (S11 Table) by country, (S12 Table) and stratified by age and gender (S13 Table) are detailed in the S1 Protocol.
The model estimated that worldwide there are 1,030,000 cases (95% CI, 434,000-1,750,000) and 58,900 deaths (95% CI, 23,800-95,900) due to leptospirosis annually ( Table 3 ). The majority of leptospirosis cases and deaths occur in tropical regions; 73% of the world's leptospirosis cases and deaths occur in countries situated between the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn. Highest morbidity occurred among males with 20-29 years of age (35.27 cases per 100,000, 95% CI 13.79-63.89), while highest estimated mortality occurred in older males with 50-59 years of age (2.89 deaths per 100,000, 95% CI 1.22-4.95). A significant proportion of global burden of cases and deaths due to leptospirosis occurred in the demographic group of males with 20-49 years of age (48% [95% CI 40-61%] and 42% [95% CI 34-53%], respectively).
We estimated that leptospirosis causes 1.03 (95% CI 0.43-1.75) million cases worldwide each year. These estimates place the disease among the leading zoonotic causes of morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, the number of estimated deaths (58,900; 95% CI 23.800-95,900) attributable to leptospirosis approaches or exceeds those for causes of haemorrhagic fever which were investigated in the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 [48] and other studies [58] . The large majority of the estimated disease burden occurred in tropical regions and the world's poorest countries. The systematic literature review also found that adult males were the principal risk group for leptospirosis. Based on model predictions, morbidity and mortality was estimated to be high in regions, such as South and Southeast Asia, where leptospirosis is an under-recognized public health problem. Our approach had to address key challenges in the estimation of leptospirosis burden. First, the available data was sparsely distributed and not representative of all world regions. We therefore developed a model to estimate morbidity and mortality in regions with limited or no information and identified a final model that captured a significant amount of the variability (R 2 , 0.600) in the data from quality-assured studies. Although 95% confidence intervals for estimates were calculated to account for the variability in our assumptions, we may not have accounted for all potential uncertainties. Leptospirosis is an environmentally-transmitted disease [1] [2] [3] 6] ; disease risk may therefore vary significantly within a region, which in turn would contribute to spatial uncertainty. We applied criteria, accepted by an independent panel of experts (LERG), to select studies that employed appropriate methodologies with respect to case definitions, case ascertainment and case confirmation. Yet regional differences in access to health care facilities and laboratory testing, which are not explained by country-specific indicators of health and socioeconomic wealth, may have contributed to unaccounted variation. The true uncertainty may thus be greater than indicated by the confidence intervals for our estimates. Lastly, because specific countries had atypical characteristics, their model-predicted morbidity and mortality had high uncertainty which resulted in inflated estimates due to exponentiation from the log scale, which incorporates the standard error into the estimate. Estimates are therefore most reliable at the regional and global level, and caution should be taken when interpreting individual country estimates. The second challenge related to incomplete laboratory testing of suspected cases. This is a widespread problem for leptospirosis since case confirmation relies primarily on identifying seroconversion of agglutinating antibodies between acute and convalescent-phase samples [52] . Among studies with information on laboratory confirmation procedures, complete laboratory testing for leptospirosis was not performed in almost 50% of the suspected cases. In order to address this source of under-reporting, we adjusted estimates of morbidity and mortality for the effect of incomplete diagnostic testing. Similar barriers with respect to sparse data and reliance on antiquated serologic tests are shared among many of the neglected diseases [59] , and as with leptospirosis, have directly contributed to their neglected disease status. Although our modelling approach has limitations, it may have a more generalizable application in estimating the disease burden for neglected diseases.
Our estimates likely underestimate the morbidity of leptospirosis, since disease incidence data was obtained from hospital-based surveillance studies (S3 Table) , the majority (65%) of which used passive case ascertainment. Similarly our estimates of mortality represent an underestimation since these were highly sensitive to estimates of morbidity. We obtained information on case fatality ratios from 35 studies, which included 20 (57%) conducted in World Bank upper income countries. The mean case fatality ratio (6.85%) that we used in modelling mortality is likely a significant underestimation of the ratios that occur in resource-poor regions. Worldwide case fatality ratio, based on estimated cases and deaths, was even lower (5.72%) due to the influence of the worldwide age and sex population structure. We opted to use a conservative assumption when faced with uncertainty, rather than attempt to model regional differences in case fatality ratio, or use ad-hoc adjustments. Our estimates of annual leptospirosis cases are higher than the approximately 500,000 cases estimated based on a survey of national surveillance data [47] . The higher estimates obtained from our study are plausible since this survey was conducted among a convenience sample of Ministries of Health.
The study's morbidity estimates reflect the incidence of severe leptospirosis, rather than rates for clinical or symptomatic illness, since selected studies used case definitions that relied on detection of severe manifestations [60] . Severe leptospirosis is generally believed to account for a small fraction (5-15%) of all clinical infections [1, 14, 61] . There is a growing recognition that leptospirosis is an important cause of an acute febrile illness: leptospirosis has been shown to be the cause of 5-69% of acute undifferentiated or non-malarial fever cases in different parts of the world [16, 18, [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] 62] . Leptospirosis, as in the case of dengue [58] , may therefore account for a much greater burden than indicated by morbidity estimates of severe disease.
The study's findings highlight the contribution of geography, climate, and poverty in the worldwide distribution of leptospirosis. Countries situated in the tropics had the highest estimated disease incidence and accounted for 73% of the world's estimated cases. This pattern is attributable to environmental and social conditions which promote the abundance of reservoir animals, survival of the bacterium in soil and surface water, and risk of human exposures with these sources of infection [3, 22, 23] . Tropical climate also favours transmission of leptospirosis, which is often seasonal and increases during periods of heavy rainfall [6, 19] . The disease is well-recognized as a health problem of impoverished rural-subsistence farmers [13, 15] , pastoralists [16, 45, 63] , and urban slum dwellers [19] [20] [21] [22] . We found that life expectancy, which serves in part as a proxy for poverty, was an independent predictor of country-specific disease incidence (Table 2) . Finally, although urban slum environments are an emerging and increasingly important setting for leptospirosis transmission [19] [20] [21] [22] , in our model, country percent urbanization was inversely associated with leptospirosis incidence, reflecting in part the high burden of leptospirosis in rural settings, but also the well-recognized association between lower aggregated country-level percent urbanization and poverty.
The study identified regions within the developing world where the burden of leptospirosis may be significantly under-recognized. The annual morbidity of leptospirosis was estimated to be high in countries of South and Southeast Asia with large populations, such as India (19.7 cases [95% CI 6.8-36.8] per 100,000 population, S12 Table) and Indonesia (39.2 [12.8-78 .0] per 100,000 population, S12 Table) . Although transmission is endemic and large outbreaks have been reported in these countries [15, 62, 64] , surveillance for leptospirosis has not been routinely performed.
An important limitation of the study was the scarce data on disease burden in specific geographical regions. This was particularly evident for regions within Africa, where information on morbidity and mortality rates was available from two studies. Although the burden estimates may not be reliable for this region, there is increasing evidence suggesting their plausibility. A large spectrum of sylvatic and domestic animals are reservoirs for Leptospira in Africa [65, 66] ; leptospirosis is a recognized animal health problem in the region [4] . A recent systematic review found high seroprevalence among human populations in different settings across the continent [4] . Furthermore, surveys of patient populations have found leptospirosis to be a prevalent cause of acute febrile illness [32, 63] . A recent population-based study reported an annual morbidity for leptospirosis of 75-102 cases per 100,000 population in northern Tanzania [45] . Additional locally representative data will be key to validate our estimates for the African continent and other regions with sparse data, though these efforts will require resources and time and may delay decision making with respect to strengthening surveillance and implementing control measures.
Our study was also limited by the lack of studies that reported age and gender-specific incidence for morbidity and mortality. We extracted data from case series of representative patient populations in order to estimate the age and gender-specific risk for leptospirosis, which in turn was incorporated as an input in our models (S1 Protocol pp. 5-8 and Fig 3) . We found that the risk of acquiring leptospirosis was higher in adults than children and higher in males than females, and highest among adult males with 20 to 29 years of age (S6 Table and Fig 4A) . Male gender preference is a well-recognized phenomenon in leptospirosis and due to the gender-specific occupational and peridomicilary risk activities [22] [23] [24] 67] . The age and genderspecific risk for death had a different pattern: the risk for death increases with increasing age (S6 Table and Fig 4B) , a finding which has been observed in a range of epidemiological settings [14] . Since these estimates were based on small number of case series, additional studies of well-characterized patients from representative sites would therefore improve these estimates. Our systematic review did not include more recent literature from 2008; however there have been few reports on population-based mortality and morbidity rates during this interval. Leptospirosis is caused by a large number of serovar and serogroup agents which vary across regions. We could not evaluate the contribution of such agents on mortality and morbidity estimates, since less than 20% of the studies reported serologic or culture identification of these agents.
Our study provides a baseline estimate to evaluate trends, as processes of climate and land use evolve in the future [6] . By 2037, the majority of the world's population will be inhabitants of urban centres in developing countries. A large proportion of this population will reside in slum settlements, where poor sanitation has created the conditions for annual rainfall-associated epidemics [22, 68] . Extreme weather events and flood-related disasters [6] are predicted to escalate with global climate change [69, 70] . As deforestation and agricultural expansion intensify in tropical regions [71] , rural-based farming populations may be increasingly exposed to leptospirosis. A formal burden of disease calculation will need to be performed to provide estimates based disability-adjusted life years (DALYs). As a caveat, the health outcomes of leptospirosis have been traditionally associated with its acute disease. The disease causes sub-acute and chronic complications, such uveitis [72] , and persistent complaints [73] . However, the frequency and magnitude of long-term sequelae have not been rigorously quantified. Although the disease is life-threatening, the overall DALYs attributable to leptospirosis may be relatively low. Considering the annual number of deaths worldwide, the impact of leptospirosis equals that of canine rabies (59,000 annual deaths) [74] . The burden of leptospirosis, with respect to morbidity, is higher than some other important neglected tropical diseases, including visceral leishmaniasis and severe dengue, and is similar to others, including echinococcosis and cysticercosis [75] .
The study provides decision makers with an evidence base to implement effective policy and responses to leptospirosis. As identified in this study and cited in previous reviews [42, 43] the lack of an adequate diagnostic test remains a foremost barrier. The demand for improved diagnostics will be greater than indicated by cases estimated in this study, since these estimates reflect the burden of severe leptospirosis and represent a lower boundary for the actual number. The distribution of the leptospirosis burden (Fig 2) overlaps significantly with that for malaria [48] , dengue [48, 58] , and enteric fever [48] . Misdiagnosis between these diseases is common [16, [39] [40] [41] and in the case of leptospirosis, leads to delayed treatment of severe complications and poor outcomes [40] . Development and roll-out of diagnostic protocols could be leveraged and implemented synergistically that aim to address the multiple causes of acute fever in resource-poor, high-burden regions.
Finally, the estimation of global burden of leptospirosis now provides the opportunity to evaluate One Health strategies for prevention and control. The lack of recognition of leptospirosis as an important zoonotic disease had previously hampered consideration of such approaches. Our estimates support the assertion that leptospirosis is a leading zoonotic cause of morbidity and mortality in humans. The majority of the estimated morbidity and mortality occurs in regions which have large subsistence farming and pastoral populations and where the disease is a veterinary health problem and cause of lost productivity. Additional work is needed to quantify the economic burden of leptospirosis, which incorporates an assessment of its impact on animal health. Vaccines for leptospirosis are routinely used in livestock and domestic animals, although they do not appear to be transmission-blocking [5] . Investment towards identifying interventions, such as vaccines, may therefore yield synergistic health and societal benefits for poor populations in developing countries. Moreover, more sustainable practices considering ecosystems [76, 77] are needed for disease prevention. Finally, leptospirosis is a social-ecological problem, which often occurs in the context of social inequity. Therefore there is a critical need to evaluate and address the investment case for interventions that target the underlying environmental conditions and infrastructure deficiencies, such as open sewers in urban slum communities [22] [23] [24] , in order to make sustainable progress against this neglected disease. 

The rDNA of Drosophila melanogaster can contain two types of non-homologous insertion sequences in the 28S gene (1-8). These insertions are unlike intervening sequences found in other genes and appear to have a repressive effect on the transcription of rDNA. It is possible to detect only a few high molecular weight transcripts containing insertion sequences and yet the nucleotide sequence of the region in which rDNA transcription initiates is identical in units containing insertions and those without (9,10).
The type I insertions are found in more than 50% of the rDNA units of the X chromosome and not in the rDNA of the Y chromosome (11,12,13). The most common type I insertion is about 5kb long, but in addition shorter insertions have been described which are mainly comprised of 0.5kb and lkb of DNA from the right hand side of the 5kb sequence. Roughly 50% of the type I sequences are found at other chromosomal sites, where they occur predominantly in tandem arrays (14) . These type I sequences have probably undergone transposition from the nucleolus since the units within the tandem arrays are flanked by very short segments of the 28S gene (15) . Many Dipteran f l i e s have insertion sequences in their rDNA at the same site as D.melanogaster, as determined by low resolution mapping techniques (16) (17) (18) (19) . In the case of D . v i r i l i s the insertions have been shown by sequencing experiments to be at exactly the same site as the type I sequences of D.melanogaster. The D . v i r i l i s insertions, however, are flanked on both sides by a short segment of the gene present only once in uninterrupted units (20) . In our previous sequence analysis of the junctions of several long type I insertions with the D.melanogaster 28S gene, we found only a single copy of this rDNA sequence to the right of the insertion. At the l e f t hand junction nine nucleotides of rDNA are deleted (15) .
In order to determine whether this was the only arrangement of sequences flanking type I insertions in the genome we decided to sequence the junctions between the short type I insertions and rDNA. In the cloned EcoRI fragments of rDNA which we examine in this paper, the short type I insertions are flanked by a duplicated sequence of 7 to 15 nucleotides with no deletions of flanking rDNA.
Construction of Cloned DNAs. Recombinant DNAs were constructed in collaboration with Simon Kidd and Mick Browne. D.melanogaster embryonic DNA was digested to completion with EcoRI and enriched for fragments of 12kb-17kb, either by preparative sucrose gradient sedimentation or preparative electrophoresis on agarose gels (14) . Approximately 0.25ug of gradient purified DNA was ligated to 0.5ug of purified l e f t and right arms of Xgt.xWES (21) at a concentration of about lOOug/ml. The ligated DNA generated 2 x 10 plaque forming units in the in v i t r o packaging reaction (22) .
From 2 x 10 plaques which were screened, 77 were selected which hybridised to the lkb BstI fragment and not the 4kb HindiII/BstI fragment of the Dml03 insertion. One of these phages, XMB27, is described in this paper. Approximately lug of the gel purified EcoRI fragments were ligated with 0.5ug of dephosphorylated EcoRI linear molecules of pAT153 (23) . The ligation mix generated 7 x 10 ampicillin resistant transformants of E.coli. Of these, 16 hybridised with the lkb BstI fragment and not with the 2.6kb Smal fragment of Dml03. Two of these recombinants, RI9 and RI10, are described in this paper. DNA Sequencing. All sequencing was performed as described by Maxam and Gilbert (24) . Restriction fragments were labelled by ' f i l l i n g i n ' the cohesive termini using reverse transcriptase (from J . Beard). The Kpnl site was label lee (Amersham).

was labelled using terminal transferase mediated addition of P-cordycepin
We have previously examined the nucleotide sequence at the junctions of type I sequences with rDNA in three configurations (15) :
-an rDNA unit containing a 5kb type I insertion (the rDNA segment DmlO3, reference 25); -an rDNA unit containing both a type I insertion and, 51 nucleotides upstream, a type I I insertion (Dm207, references 5 and 8);
-a fragment from the chromocentral heterochromatin consisting of 5 tandemly arranged type I elements, each joined to a 21 segment of rDNA on i t s l e f t and a 13 nucleotide segment on i t s right (Dm219, reference 14) . In each of these cases the junctions are identical. At the l e f t hand side of the type I insertion there is a deletion of nine nucleotides of rDNA. The right hand junction corresponds to the site of the rDNA insertions in D . v i r i l i s .
There are in addition a set of shorter type I insertions which we had not examined in the above experiments. The majority of these are either O.5kb or lkb in length and have sequence homology to the extreme right hand part of the 5kb insertion. We selected clones which would hybridise to sequences from this right hand region but not to sequences from the l e f t hand part of the long type I insertions (see Materials and Methods). We sequenced the entire insertions in three of these clones, RI9, RI10, and MB27, following the strategies shown in figure 1. The 28S rRNA of D.melanogaster consists of four polynucleotide chains (the 2S RNA, 5.8S RNA, 28Sa RNA, and 28Sp RNA) held together by hydrogen bonding. The insertions divide the rDNA coding for 28SB RNA into two regions, 28Sgl and 28Se2, and i t is this region of the 28S gene which is shown by the shaded blocks in figure 1. The top map shows the right hand portion of the 5kb Dml O3 insertion which we have sequenced. This sequence is shown in figure 2 . Each of the shorter insertions is an extremely homologous segment of this sequence, showing only 0.28% to 0.40% sequence divergence (see the legend to Fig.2 ). Each has an identical right hand junction with rDNA to the one found in DmlO3. The positions of the l e f t hand ends of the shorter insertions are indicated by arrows on the Dml O3 with either rDNA or the insertion. The clone MB27 has a lkb insertion flanked by a 7 nucleotide repeat. Again at the l e f t hand junction the contribution of rDNA to the sequence duplication is ambiguous, since the last nucleotide of the repeat is found in the long type I sequence in this position.
The clone RI9 contains a rearranged rDNA segment with two type I insertions 380 nucleotides apart. The shorter of these two insertions is 47 nucleotides long and is flanked on both sides by a 14 nucleotide repeat which appears to be constituted entirely of rDNA sequences (Fig.3) . The larger (747 nucleotide) insertion occurs downstream in the rDNA transcription unit. Its l e f t hand junction is at the unusual site in the 28Sg2 gene indicated by the open arrow above the rDNA sequence in figure 2 . At the right hand junction of this insertion, however, we find the usual sequence junction between type I sequences and the 28Sg gene (Fig.3) . The structure of this rDNA segment could be a result of a large deletion extending from the l e f t of the longer insertion into the previous rDNA unit. Alternatively, a DNA fragment comprised of insertion sequences and adjoining 28Sf}2 sequences could have been inserted into an rDNA unit which already contained an insertion. The effect is a duplication of a 380 nucleotide sequence on both sides of the insertion.
Several lines of circumstantial evidence suggest that the type I insertion sequences of D.melanogaster rDNA are specialised transposable elements. In addition to being inserted into a high proportion of the 28S genes of the X chromosome, the sequences are present at other heterochromatic loci and also in a region 102C of the fourth chromosome (13) . Our previous sequencing studies have indicated that the tandemly arranged type I sequences found in the heterochromatic regions outside the nucleolus organiser (14) are flanked by short segments of rDNA (15) . This suggests that the progenitor of these sequences was originally located within the nucleolus organiser and following excision became tandemly amplified either by autonomous replication or by unequal exchange following its insertion at a new chromosomal site. The rDNA segments which flank these type I units are identical to those immediately adjacent to the type I insertions in the cloned EcoRI fragments of rDNA, DmlO3 and Dm207 (15) . The type I insertion in Dml03 is approximately 5kb in length and is representative of about 60% of the rDNA units on the X chromosome. The rDNA segment Dm207 contains both a type I and a type I I insertion. The identity of the sequence junctions in a l l these cases suggests that they represent a principal sequence arrangement in the genome (15) . This is surprising since to the l e f t of the insertion there is a deletion of nine residues of rDNA. Thus i t would seem that an rDNA unit which is incapable of producing functional rRNA has been spread around the genome.
In this paper we characterise rDNA units containing type I insertions which d i f f e r from the 5kb insertion in Dml O3 in several respects. These units have shorter insertions which are flanked on both sides by a nucleotide sequence present only once at this site in uninterrupted rDNA units and which do not have deletions in the flanking rDNA sequence. The 5kb and 10kb insertion sequences in the rDNA of D . v i r i l i s occur at this same site and are also flanked by such a duplicated sequence (20) . We have previously referred to this duplicated sequence as the e* segment when making comparisons with D.melanogaster rDNA (15) . I t corresponds to the small segment of rDNA found on the right hand side of the type I elements in Dm219. In this paper we show that the length of the duplicated sequence varies, and so for the purposes of the following discussion we re-define the B* segment as the rDNA sequence which is duplicated. The occurence of insertion elements at identical sites in the rDNA of two Drosophila species could indicate that insertion sequences have been stably maintained at this s i t e , just as the positions of intervening sequences have been conserved in genes which encode polypeptides. However, several pieces of evidence suggest that transpositions of the type I sequences have been ongoing since the divergence of the D.melanogaster and D . v i r i l i s species. The rDNA sequence in this region is strongly conserved throughout eukaryotes. Although the insertions of D . v i r i l i s and D.melanogaster share some homology, thermal denaturation of heteroduplexes formed between the insertions indicates extensive mismatching (16) . In contrast, the chromocentral type I sequences of D.melanogaster show obvious identity with the rDNA insertions. Indeed, the junctions of 21 and 13 nucleotide rDNA segments with chromocentral type I units of Dm219 are identical to the junctions of these sequences in the nucleolar rDNA (15) . This suggests that these insertion sequences together with segments of flanking rDNA have migrated from the nucleolus relatively recently. Furthermore, the shorter type I insertions form a coterminal subset of sequences from the 5kb insertion of DmlO3, suggesting that they have been independently derived from these longer insertion elements.
Since the insertions are always found at the same s i t e , i t is l i k e l y that transposition could occur by a process of site specific recombination Whilst this partial homology might favour aberrant excisions at these sites, the "breakpoint" has clearly been out of register with the homology. These two insertions are flanked by duplicated sequences which differ in length. This is best explained if there is flexibility of the recombinational exchange within the e* site during the generation of shorter insertions. Once an extrachromosomal element has been generated containing an rDNA segment of a particular length, it could be perpetuated in the genome by homologous recombination into rDNA. Equally any novel rDNA unit generated in such a way could be spread throughout the nucleolus organiser by gene conversion or unequal exchange mechanisms acting on the rDNA units per se.
If the rDNA sequence which becomes duplicated is an essential feature of the recognition site, one might expect to find rearrangements on either side of insertions where such a sequence occurs. The deletion of rDNA to the left hand side of the 5kb insertions could be the consequence of an aberrant excision. Similarly one would expect to find evidence of aberrant excisions of sequences extending from a e* element rightwards into the 28Sg2 sequence. The duplication of a much longer part of the 28Sg2 sequence in the clone RI9 could be explained by the re-insertion of such an aberrantly excised element into another rDNA unit containing an insertion. Alternatively, this clone could be the result of a large deletion extending from the left of the 747 nucleotide insertion into the adjoining rDNA unit.
There is abundant evidence that many sequence rearrangements have occurred in this region of the 28S gene, and from the present arrangement of sequences we infer that there is a mechanism for site specific recombination at this site. This must, however, remain speculative since direct evidence for ongoing transposition has not yet been presented. Such a mechanism could also allow insertion elements to serve as "end points" for the excision of large blocks of rDNA from the tandemly arranged ribosomal genes. The selective advantage of systems that would either allow unequal exchange of blocks of rDNA or extrachromosomal replication of rDNA have been previously extolled as a potential means for correcting deficiencies of rDNA in the phenomenon of rDNA magnification (26, 27) . The sequence analysis that we present in this paper suggests a mechanism whereby the rDNA insertion elements themselves or large blocks of rDNA flanked by insertion elements could participate in such a processs. It will be of interest to examine the involvement of type I sequences in the rDNA magnification process.
Mobilized peripheral blood progenitor cells (PBPCs) have an established role in the management of patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), 1,2 relapsed Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), 3 or multiple myeloma (MM) 4 who are eligible for high-dose sequential chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT). Because the number of infused CD34 ϩ cells correlates with the rate of hematopoietic reconstitution, the availability of adequate amounts of PBPCs is a prerequisite for the feasibility of high-dose chemotherapy and ASCT. 5 There is a general consensus that patients receiving PBPC autografts containing less than or equal to 2 ϫ 10 6 CD34 ϩ cells/kg are at risk for delayed hematopoietic recovery, increased procedure-related morbidity and mortality, engraftment failure, and myelodysplasia, whereas those receiving 5 ϫ 10 6 or more CD34 ϩ cells/kg experience prompt and durable hematopoietic engraftment. 6 PBPCs are mobilized efficiently by the administration of short courses of recombinant human (rh) granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) alone or during recovery from cytotoxic chemotherapy. [7] [8] [9] Indeed, due to prior chemoradiotherapy, disease stage, or disease-intrinsic factors, a substantial proportion of cancer patients (10%-30%) mobilize suboptimal amounts of CD34 ϩ cells (ie, Յ 2 ϫ 10 6 CD34 ϩ cells/kg). [10] [11] [12] The lack of autologous stem cells raises important issues for the clinical management of patients for whom ASCT has proved to be clinically beneficial.
PBPC mobilization might be improved by molecules capable of interfering with the mechanisms regulating hematopoietic stem cell trafficking. [13] [14] [15] [16] An increase of CD34 ϩ cell mobilization might also be achieved by combinations of cytokines, such as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (rhGM-CSF) plus rhG-CSF, 17 interleukin-3 (rhIL-3) plus rhG-CSF or rhGM-CSF, 18 and PIXY-321. 19 Additionally, PBPC mobilization may be enhanced by incorporating in the standard mobilization regimen early-acting cytokines, such as stem cell factor (rh-SCF) [20] [21] [22] or flt-3 23 ligand. So far, substitutes or adjuncts to rhG-CSF either failed to substantially improve the mobilization of blood progenitors achieved with rhG-CSF alone or resulted in a limited improvement. 24, 25 Growth hormone (GH) is a pleiotropic cytokine targeting a variety of nonhematopoietic and hematopoietic cells by binding to a specific receptor. 26, 27 In vitro, rhGH significantly increases colony formation by human myeloid (granulocyte-macrophage colonyforming unit [CFU-GM]) and erythroid (erythroid burst-forming unit [BFU-E]) progenitors. [28] [29] [30] In vivo, a 7-day course of rhGH induces a significant increase of marrow and spleen CFU-GMs and BFU-Es in both normal and azidothymidine-treated mice. 31 Following syngeneic marrow transplantation, rhGH significantly hastens multilineage hematopoietic recovery in mice. 32 When given for 4 weeks, rhGH restores the age-associated decline of marrow cellularity in rats, 33 as well as the stem cell mobilization capacity in mice. 34 Collectively, these data suggest that bone marrow is an important target for the action of rhGH and allow us to hypothesize that rhGH might enhance rhG-CSF-induced mobilization of CD34 ϩ cells by increasing the numbers of marrow stem cells susceptible to be released on a subsequent or concomitant mobilization stimulus.
Based on these findings, we conducted a pilot study aimed at investigating the feasibility and efficacy of rhGH administration as an adjunct to chemotherapy plus rhG-CSF for enhancing stem cell mobilization. Included in this study were 16 consecutive patients with relapsed or refractory hematologic malignancies who had failed a first mobilization attempt with chemotherapy plus rhG-CSF. Patients were then remobilized with chemotherapy plus rhG-CSF and rhGH. Mobilization failure was defined as a peak value of circulating CD34 ϩ cells equal to or less than 10/L, or a collection of CD34 ϩ cells equal to or less than 2 ϫ 10 6 /kg. To eliminate the interpatient variability induced by the considerable heterogeneity in patient characteristics and responses to a given mobilization regimen, we prospectively compared the number of PBPCs mobilized into blood after 2 consecutive cycles of the same chemotherapy regimen administered in the same patient. The objectives of the study were to: (1) assess the activity of rhGH in increasing rhG-CSF-induced mobilization and harvesting of CD34 ϩ cells, committed colony-forming cells (CFCs), as well as the more primitive long-term culture-initiating cells (LTCICs), and (2) assess the safety and tolerability of rhGH, given in combination with rhG-CSF. Our data indicate that in the great majority of poor mobilizers addition of rhGH to rhG-CSF allows efficient mobilization and collection of CD34 ϩ cells with maintained functional properties.

Between September 2000 and December 2002, 16 hard-to-mobilize consecutive patients with relapsed or refractory hematologic malignancies who were eligible for ASCT were enrolled in this study. Demographic and disease characteristics for these patients at the time of study entry are shown in Table 1 . Patients (11 women, 5 men) ranged in age from 19 to 67 years (median, 52 years). Previous chemotherapy was to be completed at least 3 weeks before study entry. Patients were required to have a Karnofsky performance status of 80% or greater, left ventricular ejection fraction more than 50% at rest by echocardiography assessment, and a diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) more than 50%. Criteria for exclusion were: (1) renal or hepatic insufficiency or severe central nervous system or psychiatric diseases, (2) hepatitis B or C, or HIV tests positive, and (3) pregnancy. The study protocol was approved by Institutional Ethical Committee and written informed consent was obtained from each patient. Patients mobilized with rhGH/rhG-CSF were retrospectively compared with an historical group of hard-to-mobilize patients who were treated at our institution between January 1999 and August 2000, before the present study was conducted. The historical group of hard-to-mobilize patients included 14 transplantation-eligible patients (9 women, 5 men) with a median age of 50 years (range, 28-67 years).
Studied were patients eligible to receive 2 consecutive cycles of the same chemotherapy regimen. An overview of the study is shown in Figure 1 . Following the administration of a first chemotherapy cycle supported by rhG-CSF (5 g/kg/d subcutaneously), patients identified as poor mobilizers (ie, those with a peak value of circulating CD34 ϩ cells Ͻ 10/L, or collecting Յ 2 ϫ 10 6 CD34 ϩ cells/kg) were remobilized with the same chemotherapy regimen supported by rhGH (100 g/kg/d, subcutaneously; maximum daily dose of 6 mg) plus rhG-CSF (5 g/kg/d, subcutaneously). Thus, according to the study design, the kinetics of PBPC mobilization achieved following cycle 1 served as intrapatient control to assess the mobilization achieved following cycle 2. Despite the fact that no prospective control group was envisaged for this pilot study, patients mobilized with rhGH/rhG-CSF were retrospectively compared with an historical group of hard-to-mobilize patients who had failed PBSC mobilization after standard-dose chemotherapy plus rhG-CSF (5 g/kg/d) and were remobilized with the same chemotherapy plus a higher dose of rhG-CSF (15 g/kg/d; Table 6 ). Mobilization treatments were started 48 hours after stopping chemotherapy and administered until the completion of CD34 ϩ cell harvest. After each mobilization cycle, absolute numbers of circulating CD34 ϩ cells and committed and primitive hematopoietic progenitors were monitored on a daily basis starting when the white blood cell (WBC) counts were 1000/L or higher and until completion of leukapheresis.
Standard-dose chemotherapy regimens administered to study patients are listed in Table 2 . rhG-CSF (filgrastim) was from Roche (Milan, Italy) and rhGH (somatropin) was from Serono (Milan, Italy). Both rhG-CSF and rhGH were kept refrigerated at 2 to 8°C until the time of injection. Lyophilized rhGH was reconstituted with sterile water for injection before subcutaneous administration.
PBPC collection was started when equal to or more than 10 CD34 ϩ cells/L blood were detected. If the number of circulating CD34 ϩ cells remained 10/L or less, leukapheresis procedures were continued daily until the completion of CD34 ϩ cell harvest (target cell dose was Ն 5 ϫ 10 6 CD34 ϩ cells/kg). Each leukapheresis processed approximately 2.5-fold the total blood volume using a Cobe Spectra apparatus (Gambro BCT, Lakewood, CO).
Samples were analyzed for expression of CD34 on a FACScalibur flow cytometry system (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA) equipped with a Macintosh PowerMac G4 personal computer (Apple Computer, Cupertino, CA) using Cell Quest (Becton Dickinson) software. Briefly, cells (1 ϫ 10 6 ) were labeled with either phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated anti-CD34 (HPCA-2; Becton Dickinson) or with a mouse IgG1-PE antibody (Becton Dickinson) as negative control and analyzed for FL2 and low side scatter. A gate was established from the analysis of forward and light scatter to include all WBCs but to exclude platelets, red blood cells, and debris. CD34 ϩ cells were assessed by analysis of a minimum of 50 000 events.
The assay for committed CFCs, including CFU-GMs, BFU-Es, and multilineage progenitors (CFU-Mix), was carried out as previously described. 35 Briefly, 1 to 5 ϫ 10 4 nucleated cells from mobilized blood or leukapheresis were plated in 35-mm Petri dishes in methylcellulose-based medium (HCC-4100; StemCell Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) supplemented with rhSCF (50 ng/mL; StemCell Technologies), rhIL-3 (10 ng/mL; StemCell Technologies), rhG-CSF (10 ng/mL, StemCell Technologies), rhGM-CSF (10 ng/mL, StemCell Technologies), and erythropoietin (rhEpo, 3 U/mL; R&D Systems, Abingdon, United Kingdom). Progenitor cell growth was evaluated after 14 to 18 days of incubation (37°C, 5% CO 2 ) in a humidified atmosphere.
LTC-ICs were assayed as previously described. 36 Briefly, test cells were resuspended in complete medium consisting of ␣-medium (Cambrex, Verviers, Belgium) supplemented with fetal bovine serum (12.5%; StemCell Technologies), horse serum (12.5%; StemCell Technologies), Lglutamine (2 mM), 2-mercaptoethanol (10 Ϫ4 M), inositol (0.2 mM), folic acid (20 M), and freshly dissolved hydrocortisone (10 Ϫ6 M). Test cell (5-8 ϫ 10 6 nucleated cells) suspension was seeded into cultures containing a feeder layer of irradiated (8000 cGy) murine M2-10B4 cells (3 ϫ 10 4 / cm 2 , kindly provided by Dr C. Eaves, Terry Fox Laboratory, Vancouver, BC, Canada) engineered by retroviral gene transfer to produce human IL-3 and G-CSF. 37 
Patients with histologic bone marrow involvement at study entry were evaluated by bone marrow biopsies after each mobilization attempt; patients with molecular or cytogenetic markers had their leukapheresis results analyzed using either cytogenetic analysis or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis for immunoglobulin complementarity determining region 3 (CDR3) or Bcl-2 (see "Consensus IgH and Bcl-2 PCR"). All lymphoma patients were evaluated using computed tomography (CT) or 67 Ga scanning.
PBPC contamination by occult lymphoma cells was studied using CDR3 analysis. Samples of frozen or paraffin-embedded diagnostic lymph node biopsy specimens were obtained at the time of diagnosis. After mobilization treatments, aliquots of harvested PBPCs were saved for PCR analysis and comparison with the above samples. Tumor DNA was amplified using consensus V H .D and J H .D primers (FR1 primers). 39 Amplified DNA was directly Table 2 . Chemotherapy regimens used in the study patients at the first and second mobilization attempts For personal use only. on April 2, 2017. by guest www.bloodjournal.org From sequenced using V H .D and J H .D primers and V H -, D-, J H -regions and N-inserts were identified by sequence comparison. The CDR3 region was identified as the junction of these 3 regions including the N-inserts. The 20mer antisense allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) primers were designed from the CDR3 regions including N-insert. DNA from the patient samples was amplified by seminested PCR. The first amplification used the relevant V H .D family and J H .D consensus primers, whereas the second amplification was performed with the same V H .D primer and the designed ASO antisense primer. Amplified DNAs were analyzed by electrophoresis on 1.5% agarose gels containing ethidium bromide and visualized by UV light. Bcl-2/IgH PCR was used if there was no predominant CDR3 clone. For bcl-2/IgH translocation, PCR amplification of major (MBR) and minor (mcr) was performed using oligonucleotide primers originally designed by Gribben et al. 40 
To test the probability of significantly different means or medians at the first and second mobilization attempt, the Student t test for paired data (2-tail) or the Wilcoxon matched pairs test was used, as appropriate. Differences were considered significant if P was less than or equal to .05. Statistical analysis was performed with the statistical package Prism 4.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) run on a Macintosh G4 personal computer (Apple Computer).

Between September 2000 and December 2002, 16 transplantationeligible consecutive patients who failed a first mobilization attempt with chemotherapy plus rhG-CSF were remobilized with the same chemotherapy regimen followed by rhGH/rhG-CSF ( Figure 1 ; Table 2 ). Study patients were defined as poor mobilizers if the peak value of circulating CD34 ϩ cells was less than 10/L or the collection was 2 ϫ 10 6 CD34 ϩ cells/kg or less. As shown in Table  1 , the median number of cycles of chemotherapy prior to study entry was 7 (range, 1-25), with 10 of 16 patients (62%) having also received prior radiotherapy. At the time of the study, bone marrow involvement was detected in 4 of 16 patients who showed less than 10% infiltration. The median period from last treatment and inclusion in this study was 4 months (range, 1-36 months). The median interval between the 2 mobilization attempts was 1 month (range, 1-2 months). No chemotherapy or radiotherapy was given during the interval between the 2 mobilization procedures.
After both mobilization attempts, WBCs, circulating CD34 ϩ cells, CFCs, and LTC-ICs were monitored on a daily basis starting when the recovery WBC count first exceeded 1 ϫ 10 9 /L (typically on days 10-12). The median duration of cytokine administration was 13 days (range, 9-22 days) and 15 days (range, 10-22 days) after rhG-CSF and rhGH/rhG-CSF, respectively.
The median peak values of WBC counts were 17.8 ϫ 10 9 /L (range, 6.6-50 ϫ 10 9 /L) and 17.5 ϫ 10 9 /L (range, 8.0-84 ϫ 10 9 /L; P Յ .14) after rhG-CSF and rhGH/rhG-CSF, respectively ( Figure  2A ). The duration of leukocytosis was related to the duration of cytokine administration and no patient experienced any clinical sequelae in association with leukocytosis. Figure 2B shows the peak values of circulating CD34 ϩ cells detected in each patient at the first and second mobilization cycle. In all cases, rhGH/rhG-CSF administration resulted in a higher peak of CD34 ϩ cells as compared with rhG-CSF administration. Median peak values of CD34 ϩ cells/L after rhG-CSF and rhGH/rhG-CSF were 7 (range, 1-20) and 29 (range, 10-130; P Յ .0005), respectively, with a median 4-fold increase (range, 2-65; Figure 2C) . By comparing the median days of peak value of CD34 ϩ cells at the first and second mobilization attempts (12 versus 13, P Ն .05), it is evident that addition of rhGH in the mobilization regimen does not alter the kinetics of rhG-CSF mobilization. Table 3 summarizes the median peak values of circulating CFU-Mix, BFU-Es, and CFU-GMs per milliliter blood. As compared with rhG-CSF administration, the combined rhGH/ rhG-CSF treatment was associated with a median 9-fold (range, 1-828; P Յ .0005), 8-fold (range, 2-389; P Յ .0005), and 15-fold (range, 1-261; P Յ .0005) increase of circulating CFUMix, BFU-Es, and CFU-GMs, respectively (Table 3) . Peak values of total CFCs measured in each patient following rhGH/rhG-CSF were higher than those following rhG-CSF ( Figure 3A) . Median peak values of total CFCs/mL blood after rhG-CSF and rhGH/rhG-CSF were 2154 (range, 76-22 000) and 28 510 (range, 3600-81 600; P Յ .0005), respectively, with a median 13-fold increase (range, 2-528; Figure 3B ).
The combined rhGH/rhG-CSF administration resulted in significantly higher peaks of circulating LTC-ICs as compared with rhG-CSF administration ( Figure 3C ). Median peak values of LTC-ICs/mL blood after rhG-CSF and rhGH/rhG-CSF were 25 (range, 2-528) and 511 (range, 32-4303; P Յ .0005), respectively, with a median 20-fold increase (range, 2-262; Figure 3D ).
PBPC harvesting was started when at least 10 CD34 ϩ cells/L blood were detected. Such a value of CD34 ϩ cells occurred in 8 of 16 patients after rhG-CSF and 16 of 16 patients after rhGH/rhG-CSF. Mobilization with rhG-CSF alone resulted in a short duration of CD34 ϩ cell release, which allowed us to perform only one For personal use only. on April 2, 2017. by guest www.bloodjournal.org From leukapheresis in 7 of 8 patients, and 2 leukapheresis procedures in one patient. In striking contrast, after the combined rhGH/rhG-CSF mobilization a sustained CD34 ϩ cell release was observed, which allowed us to perform a median of 3 leukapheresis procedures (range, 2-4) in 15 of 16 patients. Patient no. 16 asked to be withdrawn from the study and cell samples were not collected.
Following rhGH/rhG-CSF as compared with rhG-CSF alone, significantly higher median yields per leukapheresis were detected for CD34 ϩ cells (2.3 ϫ 10 6 /kg versus 1.1 ϫ 10 6 /kg; P Յ .008), CFCs (6.3 ϫ 10 5 /kg versus 3.3 ϫ 10 5 /kg; P Յ .01), and LTC-ICs (1.6 ϫ 10 4 /kg versus 0.5 ϫ 10 4 /kg; P Յ .01; Table 4 ).
The median total collection of CD34 ϩ cells/kg body weight was 1.1 ϫ 10 6 (range, 0.8-2 ϫ 10 6 ) following rhG-CS, and 6 ϫ 10 6 (range, 2.4-15 ϫ 10 6 ) following rhGH/rhG-CSF (P Յ .008; Figure  4B ). Following rhG-CSF alone, no patient could collect the target cell dose of CD34 ϩ cells (ie, Ն 5 ϫ 10 6 /kg body weight), whereas following mobilization with rhGH/rhG-CSF 13 of 15 (87%) patients could collect the target cell dose of CD34 ϩ cells, with 2 remaining patients collecting 2.4 and 2.5 ϫ 10 6 CD34 ϩ cells/kg, respectively.
Following rhG-CSF alone and rhGH/rhG-CSF, the median total collections of CFCs/kg were 3.4 ϫ 10 5 (range, 1.3-6.9 ϫ 10 5 ) and 19 ϫ 10 5 (range, 6.3-57 ϫ 10 5 ; P Յ .008), respectively ( Figure  4C) ; the median total collections of LTC-ICs/kg were 0.5 ϫ 10 4 (range, 0.1-1.6 ϫ 10 4 ) and 4.1 ϫ 10 4 (range, 1.6-16 ϫ 10 4 ; P Յ .008), respectively ( Figure 4D ).
Toxicities occurring during rhGH/rhG-CSF administration were generally consistent with those observed during rhG-CSF administration. During injection of rhGH plus rhG-CSF, 2 of 16 patients experienced a transient hyperglycemia requiring insulin therapy, but not preventing the completion of stem cell mobilization and collection. There were no additional hematologic or extrahematologic toxicities considered possibly, probably, or definitely related to rhGH therapy.
In 4 patients (nos. 3, 6, 9, and 13) with histologic bone marrow involvement, analysis of bone marrow biopsies failed to reveal any evidence of increased tumor cell infiltration following rhGH/rhG-CSF therapy. Five patients with a molecular or cytogenetic marker had their leukapheresis products analyzed to identify contaminating tumor cells. As shown in Table 5 , in no instance could the presence of tumor cells contaminating the leukapheresis products be demonstrated. All patients with nodal masses detectable by CT or 67 Ga scan were evaluated for disease progression after rhGH/rhG-CSF injection, and in no instance could signs of disease progression be detected.
Following conditioning with either BEAM (n ϭ 10; BCNU [bischloroethylnitrosourea], etoposide, ara-C [cytarabine], melphalan) or high-dose melphalan (n ϭ 1), 11 of 16 patients underwent ASCT with rhGH/rhG-CSF-mobilized stem cells. Of the remaining patients, 3 (nos. 14, 15, and 16) received an allogeneic stem cell transplant from an unrelated marrow donor, whereas 2 (nos. 6 and 12) who had collected less than or equal to 5 ϫ 10 6 CD34 ϩ cells/kg after rhGH/rhG-CSF were reinfused with both rhG-CSF-and rhGH/rhG-CSF-mobilized stem cells and are not considered for engraftment analysis. In patients given autografts with rhGH/rhG-CSF-mobilized PBPCs, the median number of days to achieve absolute neutrophil counts equal to or more than 0.5 ϫ 10 9 /L and equal to or more than 1 ϫ 10 9 /L were 9 (range, 8-12) and 10 (range, 9-13), respectively. The median number of days to achieve platelet counts 20 ϫ 10 9 /L or higher and 50 ϫ 10 9 /L or higher were 10 (range, 9-16) and 14 (range, 12-18), respectively. After transplantation, all patients required a median of 3 (range, 0-6) platelet transfusions and one (range, 0-6) red blood cell transfusion. No patient experienced early or late graft failure.
Patients mobilized with rhGH/rhG-CSF were retrospectively compared with an historical control group of poor mobilizers who were treated at our institution between January 1999 and August 2000. This cohort includes 14 transplantation-eligible patients who had failed a first mobilization attempt with standard-dose chemotherapy plus rhG-CSF at 5 g/kg/d and had been remobilized with the same chemotherapy regimen plus a higher dose of rhG-CSF (15 g/kg/d; Table 6 ). The median number of cycles of chemotherapy prior to mobilization was 8 (range, 1-27), with 8 of 14 patients (57%) having also received prior radiotherapy. Bone marrow involvement was detected in 2 of 14 patients who showed less than For personal use only. on April 2, 2017. by guest www.bloodjournal.org From 10% infiltration. The median interval between the 2 mobilization attempts was 1 month (range, 1-2 months). No chemotherapy or radiotherapy was given during the interval between the 2 mobilization procedures.
The median duration of cytokine administration was 14 (range, 10-24 days) and 16 days (range, 12-25 days) at the first and the second mobilization attempts, respectively. The median peak values of WBC counts were 26 ϫ 10 9 /L (range, 12-50 ϫ 10 9 /L) and 36 ϫ 10 9 /L (range, 17-65 ϫ 10 9 /L; P Յ .001) after rhG-CSF at 5 and 15 g/kg/d, respectively (Table 6 ). After rhG-CSF at 5 and 15 g/kg/d, the median peak values of CD34 ϩ cells/L were 7 (range, 2-25) and 11 (range, 2-33; P ϭ .30), respectively (Table 6 ). Six (43%) and 9 (64%) patients fulfilled harvesting criteria following rhG-CSF at 5 and 15 g/kg/d, respectively. The first and second mobilization attempts resulted in similar median yields of CD34 ϩ cells per leukapheresis (1.4 ϫ 10 6 /kg, range, 0.3-1.9 ϫ 10 6 /kg versus 1.5 ϫ 10 6 /kg; range, 0.5-3 ϫ 10 6 /kg; P ϭ .62) and median total CD34 ϩ cell collections (1.4 ϫ 10 6 /kg, range, 0.3-1.9 ϫ 10 6 / kg versus 2.2 ϫ 10 6 /kg, range, 0.5-12 ϫ 10 6 /kg; P ϭ .31). None of the patients receiving 5 g/kg/d rhG-CSF could collect the target CD34 ϩ cell dose, whereas 2 of 14 patients (14%) receiving rhG-CSF at 15 g/kg/d collected the target CD34 ϩ cell dose. As compared with historical controls receiving rhG-CSF at 15 g/ kg/d, the combined rhGH/rhG-CSF mobilization was associated with a significantly higher number of patients who could collect the target dose of CD34 ϩ cells (P Յ .05, by Fisher exact test).
Data reported in this pilot study clearly demonstrate that the concomitant administration of rhGH and rhG-CSF to poor mobilizers significantly enhances mobilization of CD34 ϩ cells, committed (CFU-Mix, BFU-E, CFU-GM) as well as primitive (LTC-IC) progenitors, thus allowing the collection of adequate amounts of functionally competent stem cells. In addition, we show that rhGH given for mobilization purposes at 100 g/kg/d for up to 22 days is well-tolerated and devoid of short-term adverse events.
Included in this study were patients identified as poor mobilizers following a first mobilization attempt with chemotherapy plus rhG-CSF, that is, those with a peak value of circulating CD34 ϩ cells of 10/L or less or a collection of CD34 ϩ cells of 2 ϫ 10 6 /kg or less. These patients were therefore remobilized with the same chemotherapy regimen plus the combined rhGH/rhG-CSF therapy. After mobilization with rhG-CSF alone, only 50% of the patients were eligible for leukapheresis, but in no instance could the target cell dose of 5 ϫ 10 6 CD34 ϩ cells/kg be collected. In striking contrast, the use of rhGH plus rhG-CSF was associated with a For personal use only. on April 2, 2017. by guest www.bloodjournal.org From sustained mobilization of CD34 ϩ cells, which allowed 100% of the patients to undergo repeated stem cell collections, and 87% of them to receive the target CD34 ϩ cell dose with a median of 3 leukapheresis proceudres. Thus, the combined rhGH/rhG-CSF treatment allows patients to achieve a clinically significant increase of the median collection of CD34 ϩ cells (ie, from 1.1 ϫ 10 6 /kg up to 6 ϫ 10 6 /kg). CD34 ϩ cells mobilized under rhGH/rhG-CSF had a maintained functional activity not only in vitro, but also in vivo, as suggested by the fast hematopoietic engraftment observed in our patients following myeloablative therapy.
Chemotherapy-induced reduction of massive bone marrow infiltration by tumor cells may result at subsequent mobilization attempts in an improvement of PBPC mobilization. In our series, bone marrow involvement was detected in 4 of 16 patients who showed less than 10% involvement, thus ruling out the possibility that the improved PBPC mobilization achieved under rhGH/rhG-CSF may have resulted from chemotherapy-induced reduction of bone marrow disease.
The intervals between mobilization and remobilization may affect CD34 ϩ cell release. Given the well-known cumulative toxicity of repeated chemotherapy cycles on marrow progenitors, a reduced PBPC mobilization at the second as compared with the first chemotherapy cycle is usually observed when consecutive chemotherapy courses are administered at 4-week intervals. Limited increases in the CD34 ϩ cell yield at the second mobilization attempt have been reported in poor mobilizers who had failed the first mobilization attempt. 41 However, in our experience, administration of repeated chemotherapy cycles at 3-to 4-week intervals is associated with a decreased CD34 ϩ cell mobilization (data not shown).
Increasing the dose of rhG-CSF up to 16 g/kg/d at the second mobilization attempt in patients who had failed an initial mobilization has been reported to double the median collection of CD34 ϩ cells (ie, from 0.51 ϫ 10 6 /kg using rhG-CSF at 5 g/kg/d up to 1.1 ϫ 10 6 /kg using rhG-CSF at 10-16 g/kg/d). 42 A dosedependent mobilization response to rhG-CSF has also been achieved by increasing the dose of rhG-CSF as late as the third week of mobilization (0.07 ϫ 10 6 /kg using rhG-CSF at 5 g/kg/d versus 2.27 ϫ 10 6 /kg using rhG-CSF at 10 g/kg/d). 43 In our hard-tomobilize historical controls who had failed an initial mobilization with chemotherapy plus rhG-CSF at 5 g/kg/d, increasing the dose of rhG-CSF up to 15 g/kg/d at the subsequent chemotherapy cycle resulted in a limited increase of the total CD34 ϩ cell collection with a modest percentage of patients (14%) being able to collect an optimal target cell dose of CD34 ϩ cells.
GH acts on hematopoietic progenitors either directly by binding to specific membrane receptors or indirectly by stimulating the production of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), or interacting with hematopoietic cytokines. 44 The exact mechanism by which rhGH is able to restore the stem cell mobilization capacity in heavily pretreated patients with relapsed or refractory cancers remains a matter of hypothesis. Based on the in vivo capacity of rhGH to expand marrow and spleen hematopoietic progenitors in either normal or hematologically suppressed mice, 31 as well as to reverse age-associated loss of bone marrow progenitor cells in aged rats 33 and mice, 34 it is likely that rhGH-enhanced mobilization is related to the in vivo expansion of primitive or committed marrow stem/progenitor cells that become susceptible to being released on a subsequent or concomitant mobilization stimulus, such as rhG-CSF infusion.
The stimulation of tumor cells might represent a major concern for the in vivo use of rhGH. 45 Despite the fact that rhGH raises serum levels of IGF-I, which are associated with an increased risk of epithelial cancers, the role of rhGH in carcinogenesis is unclear, 46 and several studies have shown that there is no increase in cancer risk in patients receiving prolonged replacement therapy with rhGH. In a large epidemiologic study, the long-term treatment of GH deficiency has established health benefits without any evidence that rhGH replacement increases cancer risk. 47 Recently, the risk of relapse of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and that For personal use only. on April 2, 2017. by guest www.bloodjournal.org From of a second malignancy was compared in long-term survivors (n ϭ 47) who received rhGH for a median of 4.5 years with those survivors (n ϭ 860) who had not. 48 By landmark analysis, there was no statistical evidence that rhGH replacement therapy was associated with relapse of ALL or second malignancy. Moreover, no evidence of tumor progression has been reported in patients with AIDS treated with 100 g/kg/d rhGH for 12 weeks. 49 The potential risk of exposing our patients to a short rhGH treatment, which did not imply a chronic stimulation, was adequately outweighed by the clinical benefit deriving from ASCT. In fact, for all patients included in the present study, a high-dose chemotherapy program including autografting of hematopoietic progenitor cells was the only chance of cure, and no better alternative existed. Due to mobilization failure and the lack of autologous stem cells, all these patients should have been excluded from high-dose chemotherapy. Our patients bearing nodal masses were carefully monitored by means of CT or 67 Ga scan, whereas patients with therapy-related acute myelogenous leukemia (t-AML) and NHL were evaluated at the cytogenetic or molecular level. In no instance could radiographic signs as well as cytogenetic or molecular evidence suggesting a tumor growth stimulation be detected. However, a longer observation period and larger patient numbers are required before the concerns of tumor growth stimulation induced by rhGH can be ruled out.
The dose of rhGH used in this pilot study (ie, 100 g/kg/d) is the highest dose approved for clinical use and was empirically selected as the dose potentially allowing the highest chance to detect an effect on stem cell mobilization by means of a short treatment. Because our study has provided consistent evidence on the mobilization efficacy of the rhGH/rhG-CSF regimen, a dosefinding study will be required to address the issue of the optimal dose of rhGH to be used for PBPC mobilization.
According to a recently reported Gruppo Italiano Trapianto Midollo Osseo (GITMO) study, poor mobilizers account for 15% to 20% of chemotherapy-naïve patients and 30% to 40% of patients with relapsed or refractory cancers. 50 No reliable laboratory tests exist for identifying poor mobilizers, and no reliable and effective treatment exists to enhance mobilization in poor mobilizers. Based on our data, the combined rhGH/rhG-CSF therapy represents a very effective and safe strategy that allows efficient mobilizing and collecting of CD34 ϩ cells with maintained functional properties in nearly 90% of poor mobilizers. These findings will require confirmation from a larger appropriately controlled study including a more homogeneous cohort of patients.
In the last few decades, there have been an increasing number of dengue epidemics in tropical and subtropical countries. 1 The transmission of dengue occurs primarily through infected female mosquitoes, Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus, which acquire the virus when taking blood meals from infected humans. 2 Ae. aegypti, which has a multi-meal feeding behavior on several people, is most often found among humans in urban dwellings. 3, 4 Because dengue virus infection can be mildly/atypically symptomatic, even asymptomatic, it is likely that disease can spread silently and can remain in a community without being noticed. 5, 6 As a result, wherever there were clustering dengue cases confirmed for consecutive weeks, there might have been the possibility that infected mosquitoes are present but undetected. 7 Therefore, if the spatial and temporal factors of the clustering of dengue cases were better understood, we could more efficiently prevent and control the transmission of dengue virus.
Between 1987 and 2001, there were epidemics of dengue in Taiwan almost every 3-4 years. They started from imported cases, and most of the epidemics were small-scale involving zero or a small number of cases of dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF). 8 From 2001 to 2003, however, epidemics of dengue/ DHF predominantly caused by dengue virus serotype 2 (DENV-2) occurred in the two-city area of Kaohsiung and Fengshan, where Taiwan experienced its largest and most severe epidemic in 60 years ( Figure 1 ). Previous studies, using geographical point pattern analysis to study outbreaks in other countries, have shown that dengue cases tend to be clustered either within the same household or in nearby neighborhoods. 3, 4, 7, 9 The aim of this study was to characterize in detail the spatio-temporal patterns of the spread of dengue cases in this two-city area during Taiwan's 2001-2003 dengue epidemic. We showed that dengue case clustering occurred in a contiguous pattern at the community level and in a relocated pattern after the virus had rapidly dispersed on large geographical areas.
Study areas, dengue cases, and surveillance of dengue in Taiwan. Kaohsiung City is the second largest metropolitan area in Taiwan. Neighboring Fengshan City, which has become an extension of Kaohsiung City, is located directly to its east ( Figure 1 ). In 2002, the population density of the two-city area was ∼10,200 people/km 2 . According to the data from the late 1990s, ∼4.90 million trips were made per day within Kaohsiung City and between the two cities. 10 In addition, there were no obvious differences between the percentage of people living in business districts and residential districts in the two cities. In fact, many people in these two cities may live in one city and work in the other, increasing the frequency of movement of the dengue-infected persons between the two cities during outbreak periods. In addition, there are many night markets, outdoor markets in Fengshan City where susceptible people gather together and transmission of the virus is facilitated. Therefore, this two-city area was the major focus of virus dispersal and the infections there accounted for as much as 78% of all dengue cases occurring during Taiwan's 2001-2003 dengue/DHF epidemic.
In dengue surveillance, most vector surveillance efforts are implemented more intensively once dengue cases are reported or confirmed in Taiwan. 11 Human surveillance of dengue cases includes passive reporting and semi-active surveillance. Local physicians at all hospitals and clinics in the twocity area are required to report any suspected dengue cases and to collect plasma/serum samples from them for laboratory confirmation during epidemic periods. 12 Another semiactive surveillance system for dengue in Taiwan searching for neglected or hidden dengue cases requires local public health personnel to obtain blood samples of all fever and febrile cases located within a 500-m radius of infected residences, workplaces, and other places with epidemiologically linked to confirmed dengue cases (http://www.cdc.gov.tw). Clinical definition of dengue cases in our study was based on the same definitions of DF and DHF used by the World Health Organization. To further simplify our analysis, only total laboratory confirmed dengue cases were studied. Dengue-positive cases were confirmed by one of the three laboratory methods: molecular diagnosis by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using dengue virus-specific primers, 2 serologic testing for dengue IgM seropositive but Japanese encephalitis IgM seronegative, 13 or virus isolation in C6/ 36 mosquito cells.
14 Because the collection of mosquito density data during that time in Taiwan was not a random sampling, we preferred to use better quality data on dengue cases for further diffusion analysis. If the dengue cases in certain areas persisted for > 2 weeks, it was very likely that infected mosquitoes had not been controlled successfully. Therefore, we analyzed the geographical distribution of 4,869 confirmed dengue cases caused by dengue virus serotype 2 (DENV-2) in the two-city area and summarized the weekly data from the first case (May 5, 2001 ) to the last case (March 7, 2003) for a total of 96 weeks.
Spatial and temporal pattern analyses. We mainly focused our analysis of spatio-temporal patterns of transmission on the residences of dengue cases because we assumed that dengue virus was transmitted domestically and peridomestically in those localities where there were many confirmed dengue cases. To do this, we used point pattern analysis, documented in literature, 3, 4 to summarize our weekly data from the first case (May 5, 2001 ) to the last case (March 7, 2003) .
To identify spatial clusters of dengue cases and to estimate density surfaces of the clusters on the map, we used a two-step method involving K-order nearest neighbor analysis 15, 16 and kernel estimation. 16 K-order nearest neighbor analysis was used to determine the most appropriate bandwidth size, 17 which could reflect the geographic range of infected mosquitoes that might cause dengue cases. A diagram (Figure 2 ) using all Kth nearest neighbor index values was plotted on the y-axis, and the mean distances between each tested case and the K-order nearest neighbor were plotted on the x-axis. The closer the K-order nearest neighbor index was to zero, the more clustering there was in a tested area. Based on a plateau between 450 and 550 m in the K-order nearest neighbor index plot (Figure 2) , we estimated that 500 m (x-axis value before the slope went flat) was the most appropriate bandwidth. To avoid the boundary effect in spatial clustering detection, the circular border correction method in Crimestat II was applied. 15 Next, we used the appropriate bandwidth as the circular searching radius (500 m) to generate spatial surface of dengue risk map from those cases throughout the 96-week FIGURE 1. The two-city area (Kaohsiung City and Fengshan City) located between 22°30Ј30Љ to 45Ј30Љ N, and 120°14Ј30Љ to 23Ј30Љ E in southern Taiwan. Names of the districts are labeled. 
Case georeferencing. The addresses of the 4,869 confirmed dengue cases whose residence information could be found in Taiwan's residence database were converted to geographic coordinates. After excluding those whose addresses we could not find, we were left with 4,587 confirmed dengue cases (94%), which we used to characterize the patterns of disease diffusion.
The accuracy of geocoding was tested by randomly selecting 454 cases to be compared using a GPS receiver (Garmin, Taiwan), digital aerial photographs (supported by the Aerial Survey Office, Forest Bureau, Council of Agriculture, Taiwan), and the Web GIS household registration database provided by the Kaohsiung Civil Affairs Bureau web site (http:// address.kcg.gov.tw). After eliminating seven outliers (0.2%) resulting from inconsistencies between the GPS receiver and aerial photographs, we found the mean error for 447 residential addresses to be 31.5 m, which was acceptable for data analysis.
Demographics of the dengue cases. Figure 3C ). Eighty-five percent of the cases in the first wave occurred in a single focal area (Area F), whereas 83% of the cases in the second wave were spread over Areas A-F, a much wider pattern ( Figure 3B and C) . During the first 10 weeks of 2002, dengue cases spread from the south to the north in the A-E epidemic areas ( Figure 3C , arrows). Although 89% of the A-F areas were located in the places where population densities were > 5,000 inhabitants/km 2 ( Figure 3C , the zebra line), not all high population areas in Kaohsiung had a clustering of dengue cases during this epidemic. Only 27% of the areas with > 5,000 inhabitants/km 2 had pockets involving > 12.5 clustering dengue cases/km 2 . As indicated by dashed lines in Figure 4 , the incidence of dengue cases in initial weeks embedded in the E and F epidemic areas overlapped with the most severe regions where the cumulated density of dengue cases during the entire epidemic period was > 125 cases/km 2 , represented by deep gray in Figure 4 . Geographical clustering cases and dynamic dispersion. Although we regarded the 2001-2003 epidemic of dengue/DHF as one epidemic period because only one serotype (serotype 2) and one genotype of dengue virus was isolated from indigenous dengue cases based on high identity of viral sequences, 18 we preformed a detailed analysis of the spatial diffusion patterns of the dengue cases in these two waves. To closely study the spread of the dengue cases in the abovementioned six different clustering areas over time by weekly basis, we designated the week in which the index case oc- Figure 4) , although the index case of these new areas involving dengue cluster cases was identified in Week 24, 2 weeks prior. Apparently, dengue cases at Week 26 involving not only 84% of them originated from previous weeks maintaining the first cluster but also forming the second cluster as peanut-shaped, implying that the newly formed second cluster was relocation diffused from the first cluster. In brief, Area F was found to have concentric circles expanding outward from Week 22 to Week 26 of 2001 with overlapping and expanding boundaries centered on a single epidemic focus, which was initially identified in the 2001. There was an average of 23 new cases/km 2 /wk during this time.
Wave 2: initiating diffusion of dengue cases in Area E (Weeks 58-62, June-July 2002). In the second wave of the epidemic, the average number of cases in Area E increased dramatically from < 7 (Week 58 in Figure 4 : Area E) to 34 cases/km 2 /wk (Week 61 in Figure 4 : Area E). Between June 10, 2002 and July 12, 2002, the risk area grew outward at an average rate of 19 km 2 /wk ( Figure 4 : Area E). This quickly expanding pattern of dense case distribution made Area E the largest cluster area involving the most cases. In that area, 10 of the 12 cases clustered in the initial week of the second wave (Week 58 of the epidemic period) were located within the 700-m-diameter dashed-line circle. Thirty-one of the 36 new cases that occurred the following week (Week 59) were clustered around the same center as the previous week. The focal area was identical, and the risk area had expanded by 2 km in diameter. This pattern of diffusion in Area E was quite similar to that identified in Area F. By Week 60, relocation diffusion, a phenomena characterized leaving the original area behind to move to new areas, 17 had occurred. Forty-two of the 52 (80.8%) new cases were clustered. In fact, 18 of the 42 cases (42.8%) shared the same addresses or lived in neighboring buildings. They neighbored the cases of Week 58 and also imparted the same living space, which included outdoor day markets, parks, night markets, and areas with high mosquito indices. This made clustering likely to occur. At this time, we found two new clusters located in the northern parts of the two-city metropolitan area, giving the whole risk area a "Mickey Mouse" shape (Area E in Figure 4) . In Week 60, sporadic cases located in the southern part of the Mickey Mouse appeared outside of the estimated risk area (e.g., occurring relocation diffusion again). These new areas of sporadic cases were found to be part of even larger cluster areas in the following 2 weeks. In Week 61, new cases increased sharply. Most (106 of 131; 80.9%) were clustered. For Area E, a critical point was reached after Week 60, when the number of cases began increasing sharply.
Small-scale diffusion in other areas. In contrast, the transmission of dengue in Areas A-D ( Figure 5 ) was quite restricted, staying under 1 km in diameter. Most of the risk areas stayed near the center of the initial outbreak site, showing contiguous diffusion following a concentric circle spreading pattern in Areas A, C, and D but not in Area B ( Figure  5 ). In Area B, where dengue cases spread in a small-scale relocation diffusion pattern, the outbreak started with one initial clustering. That cluster disappeared and reappeared again with a new focus.
A large-scale epidemic of dengue reflects the continuous existence of several series of transmission chains. 1, 19 Spreading can be explained by the movement of either infected mosquitoes or infected people through a neighborhood. [3] [4] [5] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] In this study, we identified two different spatial diffusion patterns: contiguous diffusion and relocation diffusion. The range of dengue virus distribution began to spread quickly through the two-city area, with relocation diffusion occurring simultaneously with contiguous diffusion. Most importantly, if the number of human-mosquito transmission cycles in a cluster was large enough to successfully create another cluster, a large-scale epidemic could rapidly occur. Hence, relocation diffusion contribute greatly to the increase scale of an epidemic because it facilitates the spread of the virus to different localities (Figure 3) . 26 The change from contiguous diffusion to relocation diffusion in our study could have been because the original contiguous diffusion pattern might have reflected the direction of the outward expanding activity among those infected vectors serving as "the source of the infection" for 2-3 weeks. There could have been an increase in herd immunity, limiting the size of the original/earlier epidemic site(s). This could have been followed by the migration of dengue virus infected persons carrying the virus to other areas resulting in "relocation pattern." If this is how the change in diffusion pattern occurred, it would mean that early dengue control would not only limit the size of contiguous diffusion but also minimize the possibility of relocation diffusion and reduce the number of other possible epidemic sites. The two patterns of diffusion occurred in areas with high population densities ( Figure 3C ). Densely populated areas are at increased risk of importing the dengue virus and have enough susceptible people to facilitate contiguous diffusion. Furthermore, dengue virus serotype 2 (DENV-2) has seldom been involved in large epidemics in Kaohsiung before 2001, suggesting that almost none of the population there had built up sufficient herd immunity. This would mean that population density of those susceptible Kaohsiung's residents to DENV-2 would be large in 2002. Together these findings, combined with the fact that the risk ranges in this study were all greater than the mosquito flight range, suggest that the large-scale spread of dengue cases may be more a result of movement of infected people than the movement of the infected mosquitoes. However, the diffusion of dengue was restricted in areas with low population densities, slowing the limited spread of the virus and thus reducing the possibility of large-scope spread there. To reduce the chances of Taiwan becoming a dengue endemic/hyperendemic area, 27 prevention and control of dengue should emphasize more on surveillance of cases with dengue-like illness integrated with mosquito surveillance and source reduction of mosquito breeding sites.
A detailed study of spatial clustering is helpful when attempting to understand the mechanisms underlying the spread of an epidemic. In the contiguous diffusion we observed, the range of risk to dengue illness in the initial 5 weeks was limited geographically to 0.5-2.0 km in diameter, depending on time and place. Therefore, like many other infectious diseases, dengue decreased susceptibility and increased herd immunity, signifying a reduction in transmission and limiting transmission from a particular cluster. The diffusion started from an original focus area and spread outward in each epidemic region, A, D, E, and F (Figures 4 and 5) , indicating that the unidentified or uncontrolled source of infection continued to disseminate the virus in the local community after it was introduced. The contiguous pattern may reflect the active dispersal of infected Ae. aegypti [3] [4] [5] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] and their multi-meal behavior. 28 However, our case clustering pattern of concentric circles extended beyond the area of individual house, but, like the observations from different countries, we found the dispersal range of mosquitoes to be usually limited to a few hundred meters. 24, 25, [29] [30] [31] According to Gubler and others, 1 dengue cases are presented by a scattering of infected mosquitoes because dengue viruses in the earliest cluster cases are primarily transmitted to mosquitoes and require an extrinsic incubation period (EIP) to be transmitted to the next person.
As the clustering of cases continued in our study, a series of human-mosquito transmission cycles occurred in the two-city clustering areas, which might have gone beyond the clustering ranges of Ae. aegypti 22 and dengue cases 3,4 reported previously. In fact, our clustering of dengue cases in the initial 5 weeks after the establishment of the first cluster overlapped with the epidemic foci of Areas A to F, which accounted for 83-85% of cumulative cases. Again, these results re-illustrate the importance of analyzing initial case clusters.
Human activities, daily movements, and social networks were found to be important in our six epidemic areas when there was relocation diffusion. No or only very few sporadic cases were found in these areas between the previous epidemic wave and newly arising one within 4 km, a distance longer than the flying range of mosquitoes, again suggesting that infected persons might have played a predominant role in speeding up the dispersal of the virus, similar to several literature findings. 24, 25, 29, 30 Interestingly, the accelerated geographic spread of cases in A-F areas occurred just 1 week before the sharp increase in clustering shown in the epidemic curve. The undiagnosed asymptomatic dengue virus infections or unrecognized dengue cases with mild symptoms could also have made possible the silent spread of dengue virus and undetected persistence of transmission in that locality. 5, 7 Therefore, broader surveillance is needed to minimize possible total infection in the communities where dengue viruses are circulating. When doing this, whenever new cases are confirmed or clustering cases are identified in initial weeks of an outbreaks, public health officials must keep in mind that reinforced surveillance is needed to closely watch all possible common exposure sites, particularly common mosquito breeding areas or common areas where humans mingle, including parks, day/night markets, bus stops, school playgrounds, and temples. To do this, geographical information systems (GISs) can be used to locate problems and prevent a possible series of transmissions in a timely manner. This would keep the disease contained within a residence or with the activity area where the index case occurred and prevent it from spreading to surrounding areas. An enlarged cluster diameter (Area E) indicates a failure to control (Figure 4 ). This 2002 epidemic was not contained until the collaboration efforts between local environment protection agency and local department health began working simultaneously door-todoor to reduce mosquito breeding sites in different areas. This only occurred after we used GIS to show government officials that their failure to control this boundary area was a result of two administration units (Kaohsiug City and Fenghsan City) in the junction of the two-city using different control dates. In other words, Kaohiung City's mosquito control campaigns forced those infected mosquitoes to escape and fly toward Fenghsan City (locations of the two cities as shown in the Figure 1) . Their failure to coordinate resulted in the need for much more manpower to do integrated vector control for a larger epidemic.
Besides the contiguous diffusion among epidemic areas of A, D, E, and F, we also observed relocation diffusion at the community level in Areas B (Weeks 66-67), E (Weeks 59-60 and Weeks 60-61), and F (Weeks 25-26). It took ∼2-4 weeks for the disease to be spread by humans through relocation dispersion to distant areas where new epidemic foci were created. This time interval was close to or slightly longer than the time period needed for one cycle of human-mosquito-human transmission. 29 The dengue viruses spread throughout the two-city metropolitan at a speed of 2.5 km/wk, which was much slower than that reported from Thailand (148 km/mo) 32 and its rapid cross-country dispersion during World War II. 1 Therefore, speed and scale of human transmission is erratic, regardless of whether spread starts from on case or from several sporadic cases imported from different areas.
This study has several limitations. The actual number of dengue cases may have been underestimated. This underestimation might have been because some asymptomatically infected people did not seek medical care or because infected people with mild symptoms/signs were overlooked by unsuspecting physicians. Our follow-up serologic surveillance in Kaohsiung found that the seroprevalence rate of dengue virus infection in schoolchildren was low (C-C King, personal communication), and most dengue cases or dengue virus-infected individuals were adults with lower asymptomatic ratios rather than children with much higher asymptomatic ratios as identified in most Southeast Asian countries. 33 Dengue cases may also have been underreported either because the physician, being less public minded, did not report suspect cases or because patients kept the information secret to avoid authorities from spraying their houses with insecticide and reduce the possibility that neighbors would complain of the smell. Another limitation might be that, in this study, we focused on dengue cases and paid no heed to environmental and climatic factors, which have also be known to contribute to persistent community transmission. Despite these limitations, our main conclusion regarding the two diffusion patterns of dengue cases from this large-scale epidemic shown in this study remain true and relevant. We believe that further research on integrating case findings with environmental conditions and social factors would be very helpful to explain the mechanism underlying the dynamic transmission of the virus between mosquitoes and human activities. Viruses carried from areas of intensive transmission can be readily transmitted to neighboring areas as well as any part of the world. The success of dengue control in many countries can be jeopardized by the reliance on insecticide spray alone, inappropriate use of insecticide, insecticide resistance, 34 a low awareness or lacking of cooperation by local residents regarding the reduction of mosquito breeding sites at the community level, and undetected cases. 11 The method used in this study, which analyzed the number of dengue cases by spatiotemporal clustering, should help in evaluating the effectiveness of control efforts and in locating hidden mosquito breeding sites, 32, 35, 36 particularly during the first 2-3 weeks after a cluster appears. Once dengue cases exceed a certain threshold, large-scale transmission chains in the risk areas will make it more likely for infected humans and mosquitoes in one locality to carry dengue viruses to other localities. As dengue cases are expanding globally and most mosquito control programs are reactive, 11 there is an increasing need to establish a cross-country dengue surveillance network, 37 improve mosquito surveillance, and advise dengue patients to restrict their activities to be better interrupt the transmission chains from human to mosquitoes, minimize the multiple introductions of dengue virus, and improve the health of people wordwide. 1 To prevent and control dengue more effectively in Taiwan and elsewhere, we recommend establishing a surveillance system capable of collecting data on major risk factors before and during an epidemic using GIS to monitor possible spatial trends in the spread of the virus. Such a system can begin to provide rapid and timely feedback so that public health agencies can more efficiently formulate and implement health policies that can respond to an ongoing epidemic.
Received May 27, 2007 . Accepted for publication May 13, 2008. 
-Reduced EphB4 expression is observed during vein graft adaptation and is associated with increased venous wall thickening. These findings suggest that EphB4 may mediate normal adult venous endothelial cell (EC) function and vein graft adaptation. We therefore tested the functional significance of EphB4 using EC with genetically reduced EphB4 signaling. EC were isolated from EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ mice. In vitro function was assessed through EC proliferation, migration, nitric oxide (NO) synthesis, and chemokine production. A mouse vein graft model was used to correlate in vitro findings with in vivo vein grafts. Smooth muscle cells (SMC) were subjected to proliferation and migration assays using EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC-conditioned medium. EphB4
EC exhibited diminished proliferation (P Ͻ 0.0001, n ϭ 6), migration (P Ͻ 0.0001, n ϭ 3), and NO production (P ϭ 0.0012, n ϭ 3). EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC had increased VEGF-A mRNA (P ϭ 0.0006, n ϭ 6) and protein (P ϭ 0.0106, n ϭ 3) as well as increased secretion of VEGF-A (P ϭ 0.0010, n ϭ 5), PDGF-BB (P Ͻ 0.0001, n ϭ 6), and TGF-␤1 (P Ͻ 0.0001, n ϭ 6). EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ -conditioned medium promoted SMC proliferation (P Ͻ 0.0001, n ϭ 7) and migration (P ϭ 0.0358, n ϭ 3). Vein grafts and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC showed similarity with regard to VEGF-A and eNOS mRNA and protein expression. In conclusion, reduced venous EC EphB4 function is associated with a proangiogenic and mitogenic phenotype. EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC have increased secretion of SMC mitogens and reduced NO production that correlate with the thickened neointima formed during vein graft adaptation. These findings suggest that EphB4 remains active in adult venous EC and that loss of EphB4 plays a role in vein graft adaptation.
EphB4; venous endothelial cells; vein graft remodeling AUTOGENOUS SAPHENOUS VEIN placed into arterial circulation as a bypass graft remains the gold standard of surgical treatment for critical limb ischemia. Reduced patency is routinely observed with the use of prosthetic graft alternatives, and it is generally believed that this inferior performance occurs secondary to the lack of an intact, functional, antithrombotic endothelium (23) . Following arterialization, human vein grafts initially demonstrate outward remodeling, which in turn is followed by the progressive acquisition of wall stiffness (20) in a process that involves inflammation (21) . Despite adaptive changes, vein graft failure secondary to progressive neointimal hyperplasia remains a major clinical problem. Currently, little is known about the molecular biology of vein graft remodeling especially regarding the balance between necessary adaptation and aberrant venous remodeling that manifests as pathological neointimal hyperplasia and vein graft failure (22) .
The molecular distinction between arterial and venous endothelial cells (EC) is determined during embryonic development, and this distinction persists in the adult vasculature (27) . EphB4, a receptor tyrosine kinase, is a marker of adult venous EC, whereas Ephrin-B2, membrane-bound ligand for EphB4, is predominantly expressed by arterial EC (1, 8, 27) . However, it is not currently clear whether EphB4 plays a role in adult EC or whether it is simply a retained embryonic venous cellular identity marker (12) . Analysis of patent human vein grafts has shown that placement of a vein into the arterial circulation results in the loss of EphB4 without an accompanying upregulation of arterial identity markers. This observation suggests that EphB4 may not just be a passive venous identity marker but rather an active mediator in adult EC homeostasis (12) .
Furthermore, Muto et al. (18) have recently shown that EphB4 loss is associated with venous wall thickening and that stimulation of EphB4 signaling during vein graft adaptation facilitates both the preservation of venous identity as well as inhibition of wall thickening. These observations suggest that EphB4 is active in adult veins in vivo and that loss of EphB4 is critical for successful venous adaptation to the arterial environment. To test the functional significance of EphB4 activity in adult cells, we examined the effects of reduced EphB4 signaling on venous EC function in vitro and compared these changes to those that occur during vein graft adaptation in vivo.
Antibodies and reagents. Primary antibodies to the following antigens were obtained as follows: total-Akt, phospho-Akt, total-ERK1/2, phospho-ERK1/2, hsp90, VEGFR2, phosphotyrosine (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA); eNOS, phospho-eNOS, caveolin-1 (Cav-1; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), VEGF-A (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), EphB4 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA); PCNA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO); BrdU Cell Proliferation Assay (Cell Signaling Technology); Dip Stain Kit (Volu-Sol, Salt Lake City, UT); and Ephrin-B2/Fc (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN).
Isolation of mouse lung endothelial cells. All animal procedures were approved by Yale University's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and were performed in keeping with the National Institutes of Health ethical guidelines. Primary mouse lung EC were isolated as previously described (18) . Briefly, under sterile conditions, lung tissue was collected from 6-wk-old EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ mice (8), minced in 0.1% collagenase, and further homogenized by repeated passage through a 14-gauge needle. After 48 h, cells were immortalized by infection with a retrovirus expressing the polyoma middle T antigen. A second sortation was performed using magnetic beads conjugated with anti-mouse CD31; EC were collected using a magnetic sorter, plated, and passaged for experimental use.
Primary vascular smooth muscle cell isolation. Primary mouse vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC) were isolated from the thoracic aortas of C57BL/6 mice using a combined collagenase and elastase digestion method (6) . Isolated cells were then cultured and used for experiment immediately following one passage.
Animal vein graft model. Fifteen-week-old C57BL/6 mice were used to generate in vivo matched vein and vein graft tissue as previously described (18) . In brief, thoracic inferior vena cava (IVC) was harvested from donor mice and transplanted into the infrarenal aorta of recipient mice using reverse interposition grafting. A 10-0 continuous running suture was used to fashion the vein graft anastomosis. All implanted vein grafts were followed by ultrasound to ensure graft patency. Thoracic IVC (vein) and vein graft samples were harvested at 1 wk postoperatively for protein analysis.
Agarose gel electrophoresis of DNA. Total DNA from EphB4
and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC was isolated and amplified using primers as previously published (8) . DNA fragments were then separated out on a 5% agarose gel containing ethidium bromide, and a UV-light box was used for visualization.
ELISA assays. EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC were plated at equal cell densities, and cell-conditioned media were collected following a 24-h period of incubation. Analysis of the conditioned media was then performed using mouse VEGF-A, PDGF-BB, and TGF-␤1 ELISA assays (R&D Systems). Samples were analyzed in duplicate form, and assays were used as directed by the manufacturer's product protocol.
BrdU SMC cell proliferation assay. EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC were plated at equal cell densities, and cell culture supernatants were collected following a 24-h period of incubation. SMC were then seeded at 3 ϫ 10 4 cells/well in a 96-well plate and incubated with serum-free medium (SFM), 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), or supernatant from EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC. BrdU solution was prepared according to the manufacturer's protocol and added into cell culture medium. SMC were then incubated for 24 h. BrdU SMC incorporation was assayed according to product protocol, with plate absorbance read at 450 nm.
EC proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) proliferation assay. EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC were seeded at equal cell densities (1 ϫ 10 4 cells/100 l) and allowed to incubate overnight in FBScontaining culture medium. Following 24 h of incubation, cells were fixed, permeabilized, and incubated with anti-PCNA antibody according to manufacturer's protocol.
ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC were plated at equal cell densities, and cell culture supernatants were collected following a 24-h period of incubation. SMC were serum starved for 15 h before the migration assay. SMC migration was assessed using 8-m transwell inserts coated with type I collagen (Corning Life Science, Tewksbury, MA); SMC were placed in the transwell upper chambers in equal cell concentrations (1 ϫ 10 5 cells/100 l). SFM, 10% FBS, and conditioned medium from EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC were used for SMC chemoattraction; chemoattractants were placed in equal volumes into the lower transwell chambers. After 8 h of incubation the cells were fixed and stained. Nonmigratory SMC on the upper side of the insert were scraped off with cotton swabs, and the SMC that migrated onto the lower side of the insert were then counted using light microscopy.
Endothelial cell migration assay. EC migration was assessed in a similar manner. EC were serum starved for 15 h and plated in equal cell concentrations (1.5 ϫ 10 5 cells/100 l) onto 8-m transwell inserts coated with 0.1% gelatin. SFM, Ephrin-B2/Fc (2 g/ml), and 10% FBS were used for chemoattractants.
Nitric oxide release analysis. Nitric oxide (NO) production by EC was analyzed as previously described (6, 18) . NO production at baseline and poststimulation with VEGF-A (20 ng/ml) was examined in EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC after 24 h of incubation. Collected medium was then processed by a NO-specific chemiluminescence analyzer. Tube formation assay. Matrigel matrix (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) was applied to 24-well culture plates and prepared for use. EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC were plated in equal densities (2 ϫ 10 5 /300 l) with or without VEGF-A (20 ng/ml) and incubated for 18 h at 37°, 5% CO 2 atmosphere. Tube formation was quantified manually using light microscopy.
Western blotting. Mouse vein and vein graft tissue were carefully harvested and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and protein was extracted using RIPA lysis buffer in combination with manual homogenization. Equal sample amounts of protein were fractionated in a SDS-polyacrylamide gel and then transferred to nitrocellulose. Membranes were then immunoblotted with appropriate primary and secondary antibodies, and membrane signals were detected using enhanced chemiluminescence technique.
Immunoprecipitation. EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC were serum starved for 15 h and then stimulated with 2 g/ml of Ephrin-B2/Fc as previously described (18) . After quantification of individual protein concentrations, sample concentrations were normalized and diluted to 1.5 mg/ml. Samples were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-EphB4 antibody and then precipitated with agarose G beads. Samples were subsequently analyzed by Western blot technique. Immunoblotting was performed for phosphotyrosine.
PCR analysis. Following serum starvation, total RNA was isolated and purified from EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (RNeasy Mini Kit; Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Total RNA was then reverse transcribed and amplified (SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis SuperMix; Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). Primers were used as previously described (18) . Quantitative PCR was performed using duplicates of each sample, and expression values were standardized to control 18S values.
Statistical analysis. Results are expressed as means Ϯ SE. Comparisons between groups were performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) or unpaired t-tests as appropriate (Prism 5, GraphPad Software). P values Յ0.05 were considered statistically significant.

ϩ/Ϫ EC. EC were isolated from both wild-type (EphB4 ϩ/ϩ ) and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ mice; both EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC expressed EphB4, consistent with a venous phenotype (Fig. 1) . Germline transmission of the original EphB4 locus mutation was confirmed through extraction of total DNA from EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC. Agarose gel electrophoresis demonstrated that EC isolated from EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ , but not from EphB4 ϩ/ϩ , showed coexpression of EphB4 wild-type (310 base pairs) and EphB4 mutant (420 base pairs) loci (Fig. 1A) , the same germline mutation as previously described (8 (Fig. 2, A and B) . Increased VEGF-A protein expression in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC was similar to the increased VEGF-A protein expression in mouse vein grafts (Fig. 2C ). There were no differences in VEGFR2 mRNA or protein expression between EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (Fig. 2, D and E) , although there was diminished VEGFR2 protein expression in vein grafts (Fig. 2F) . Analysis of EC mRNA for VEGF-A autoregulated dual-specificity MAPK phosphatases DUSP1 and DUSP5 showed increased expression levels of both DUSP1 and DUSP5 in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (Fig. 2, G and H) . These results are consistent with the finding of increased VEGF-A expression in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC, e.g., EphB4 is a negative regulator of VEGF-A expression in adult venous EC.
Reduced proliferation and migration in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC. Since VEGF-A expression was increased in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (Fig. 2) , we examined ERK1/2 activity, a signaling pathway downstream of VEGF and associated with cell proliferation and migration. There were no differences in either phosphor- EC (*P ϭ 0.0006; n ϭ 6). B: bar graph of mean densitometry of VEGF-A protein expression levels in EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (*P ϭ 0.0106; n ϭ 3). Representative Western blot is shown below. C: bar graph of mean densitometry of VEGF-A protein expression levels in vein and vein graft (*P ϭ 0.0002; n ϭ 3). Representative Western blot is shown below. D: bar graph of mean VEGFR2 mRNA expression levels in EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (*P ϭ 0.9697; n ϭ 6). NS, not significant. E: bar graph of mean densitometry of VEGFR2 protein expression levels in EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (*P ϭ 0.9595, n ϭ 6). Representative Western blot is shown below. F: bar graph of mean densitometry of VEGFR2 protein expression levels in vein and vein graft (*P ϭ 0.0377, n ϭ 6). Representative Western blot is shown below. G: bar graph of mean DUSP1 mRNA expression levels in EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (*P ϭ 0.0011, n ϭ 6). H: bar graph of mean DUSP5 mRNA expression levels in EphB4 ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (*P ϭ 0.0008, n ϭ 6).
ϩ/ϩ and EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (Fig. 3A) . Conversely, consistent with our previous results showing increased ERK1/2 phosphorylation in rabbit vein grafts (29) and proliferation in vein grafts (12, 18) , there was increased phosphorylated ERK1/2 in vein grafts compared with veins (Fig. 3B) . EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC showed a reduced rate of proliferation compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC, both as assessed with direct cell counts (Fig. 3C ) as well as with assessment of PCNA-positive cells (Fig. 3D) . EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC also showed decreased migration compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ cells, both in response to Ephrin-B2/Fc as well as to FBS (Fig. 3E) . These results suggest that the overall increase in ERK1/2 activity in vein grafts (Fig. 3B) is not observed in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC, which show diminished proliferation and migration, and is consistent with the venous EC monolayer observed during vein graft adaptation (12, 18) .
ϩ/Ϫ EC. Since VEGF-A expression was increased in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC ( Fig. 2 ) but ERK1/2 activity was not (Fig. 3 ), we examined whether there was increased activity of the Akt pathway, which is also downstream of VEGF (7). EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC showed increased phosphorylated Akt, without any changes in total Akt expression, compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig. 4A) . Vein grafts had increased expression of both phosphorylated and total Akt compared with veins (Fig. 4B) . EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC had decreased NO secretion, both under basal as well as under VEGF-stimulated conditions, compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig. 4C) . In contrast, EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC demonstrated increased tube formation with increased branch-point formation, both under basal as well under VEGF-A stimulated conditions, compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig. 4D ). Since both VEGF-A expression as well as phosphorylated Akt were increased in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC, we examined patterns of eNOS expression. EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC had similar amounts of eNOS mRNA transcripts compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig. 4E) . However, there was reduced expression of both phosphorylated and total eNOS in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig. 4F) , similar to the reduced expression of phosphorylated and total eNOS observed in vein grafts (Fig. 4G) .
Since eNOS phosphorylation and NO production were both reduced in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig.  4, F and C) , we examined hsp90, a regulatory facilitator of Cav-1 displacement from eNOS. Expression of hsp90 was reduced, and expression of the eNOS inhibitor Cav-1 was elevated in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig.  4, H and J) . These changes in hsp90 and Cav-1 expression were in contrast to vein grafts, in which no changes in hsp90 were observed (Fig. 4I) and Cav-1 protein levels were diminished (Fig. 4K) .
ϩ/Ϫ EC. Since EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC have diminished proliferation and migration (Fig. 3) as well as diminished NO secretion and eNOS phosphorylation (Fig. 4) , we hypothesized that EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC may be a functional model of the EC monolayer in vein grafts. Since vein grafts show increased neointimal volume (12, 18) , increased VEGF-A expression (Fig. 2C) , and ERK1/2 phosphorylation (Fig. 3B) , we examined EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC for production of SMC mitogens and chemoattractants that could account for these observations. ELISA of EC-conditioned medium showed increased levels of VEGF-A, PDGF- BB, and TGF-␤1 proteins secreted by EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC compared with the amounts secreted EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig. 5, A-C) . Similarly, mRNA transcript numbers of VEGF-A, PDGF-BB, and TGF-␤1 were increased in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig. 5, D-F) . SMC showed increased chemotaxis when stimulated with medium conditioned by EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC compared with SFM or medium conditioned by EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig. 5G) . Similarly, SMC stimulated with conditioned medium from EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC had increased proliferation compared with SMC stimulated with SFM or conditioned medium from EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC (Fig. 5H) . These results are consistent with EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC secreting increased levels of SMC chemoattractants and mitogens compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC.
To examine the effects of EphB4 function in venous EC, we compared several functions of EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC to those of EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC. Our data suggest that EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC have several properties that are consistently different; in particular, EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC have decreased rates of proliferation and migration (Fig. 3) , diminished EphB4 phosphorylation (Fig. 1) , increased VEGF-A synthesis (Fig. 2) and secretion (Fig. 5) , increased DUSP1 and DUSP5 expression (Fig. 2) , decreased eNOS expression and phosphorylation (Fig. 4) as well as decreased hsp90 expression and increased caveolin-1 expression (Fig. 4) . EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC also demonstrate increased secretion of SMC chemoattractants and mitogens compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC, particularly VEGF-A, PDGF-BB, and TGF-␤1 (Fig. 5) . These data suggest that EphB4 has numerous effects in adult venous EC and may play an active role in cell physiology, rather than just being a passive marker of venous identity.
There are similarities between the changes in EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC compared with EphB4 ϩ/ϩ EC with those found in vein grafts compared with veins. In particular, both EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC as well as vein grafts show diminished EphB4 function (12, 18; Fig.  1 ). In addition, both EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC as well as vein grafts show increased VEGF-A expression (Fig. 2) , increased Akt phosphorylation (Fig. 4) , and diminished eNOS phosphorylation and expression (Fig. 4) . We believe that these similarities reflect the altered physiological states of both EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC as well as vein grafts and suggest that both loss of EphB4, as well as exposure to the arterial environment in vivo, result in venous EC stress that requires an adaptive response. In particular, diminished NO and increased Akt activation suggest adaptation to stress stimuli (9, 19) , or they may simply reflect diminished eNOS activation with upstream compensation. However, our examination of vein grafts at only a single time point of 1 wk after implantation suggests that additional similarities might be found at other time points. Nevertheless, our finding that reduced levels of EphB4 in EC results in several changes that recapitulate vein graft adaptation suggests that our hypothesis, that EphB4 is active in adult venous EC, is correct.
On the other hand, there are several differences between EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC and vein grafts, which are summarized in Table 1 . Since vein grafts are composed largely of cells that are not EC, these differences suggest potential functions of vein grafts that are due to the SMC, and other non-EC cell types, rather than the EC monolayer. For example, increase ERK activation in vein grafts (Fig. 3B) suggests that vein graft proliferation is largely due to increases in SMC and other non-EC cell proliferation, consistent with the findings that vein grafts retain a single-cell EC monolayer (2, 12, 18) . Examination of the vein graft at other times beyond 1 wk after implantation might also show additional similarities and differences between EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC and vein grafts; however, early transcriptional changes after implantation, such as for VEGF-A and EphB4, are stable between 1 and 3 wk after implantation (12) .
Diminished EphB4 function appears to result in a cellular phenotype that has some proangiogenic properties, e.g., increased VEGF-A expression, increased tube formation, and increased secretion of SMC mitogens and chemoattractants. In addition, diminished eNOS phosphorylation and NO secretion may also be consistent with this phenotype (3, 11) . It is not clear whether these cellular characteristics are due to differences in activation of pathways downstream from EphB4, whether these pathways require complete suppression for phenotype emergence, or whether other factors are superimposed. The normal histology of veins in EphB4 heterozygous mice (18) suggests that reduced levels of EphB4 activity are sufficient for many of its functions, which is not surprising since complete reduction of EphB4 activity is lethal during embryonic development (27) , providing rationale for redundancy of any putative functions.
Increased VEGF-A expression has been previously reported at early times during vein graft adaptation (10, 12, 28) and is consistent with our current findings in both vein grafts as well as EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC (Fig. 2) . The significance of early increases in VEGF-A during vein graft adaptation is not well understood. VEGF-A may play a protective role in preventing intimal hyperplasia (10, 16), but it may also be a mediator of aberrant SMC proliferation and stimulus of intimal hyperplasia (28) . Since VEGF-A stimulates both ERK and Akt activity (13, 14, 17, 24) , our finding of differential effects on ERK (Fig. 3) and Akt (Fig. 4) activation between EphB4 ϩ/Ϫ EC and vein grafts suggests differential response to VEGF-A in the different cell types of the vein graft and is consistent with SMC having greater proliferation than EC in vein grafts. On the other hand, Akt activation in EC (Fig. 4A) but not in vein grafts (Fig. 4B) suggests the importance of the Akt pathway in EC responses as is observed with shear stress Akt activation in EC and the downstream activation of eNOS and resulting NO production (4, 26) . The paracrine interactions between EC and SMC during vein graft adaptation complicate the interpretation of our vein graft data; however, our findings that EC secrete SMC mitogens and chemoattractants (Fig. 5 ) are consistent with a role for EphB4 in regulating this process. 
Genetic linkage maps are essential for the understanding of genomic levels of organization of inheritance of traits. 1 Construction of highdensity and high-resolution genetic maps is a key step for fine mapping of quantitative trait loci (QTL) and marker-assisted selection. In addition, genetic linkage maps are valuable resources for the generation of chromosome-level assembly of whole-genome sequences and for comparative genome analysis. 2 In most of the recent whole-genome sequencing cases, whole-genome sequences are generated using nextgeneration sequencing (NGS). Short sequence reads are assembled into contigs. Such contigs are generally still relatively short although they vary in sizes from several kilobases to tens of kilobases. Increases in genome sequencing coverage and sequencing libraries can increase the quality of the assembly, allowing the sizes of contigs to be increased. However, NGS methods alone cannot provide the resources to assemble complex genomes at the chromosomal level. Genome sequence assemblies at this level require the assembly of tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of contigs. Highly segmented genome assemblies prohibit efficient genome analysis. Therefore, various genome resources have been created to reduce the segmentation of the genome assemblies. One of these resources is the large-insert-based physical maps. Historically, several types of large insert libraries have been used. These include yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs), 3 bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs), 4 and cosmid-based libraries. 5 YACs have the largest capacity for cloning the large inserts, but they are relatively unstable; therefore, their use in genome studies has been limited. Cosmid libraries have the smallest capacity for cloning the large inserts; therefore, their use in large insert libraries has also been limited. BACs are the most popular large insert libraries as they are stable and can hold inserts of up to 200 kb. BAC-based physical maps can organize the entire genome into restriction fingerprint-based contigs. Such contigs are similar to the whole-genome sequencing contigs, but they are constructed using overlapping restriction enzyme fingerprints rather than overlapping sequences themselves for the whole-genome sequence assemblies. By analysis of restriction fingerprints of overlapping genomic clones of BAC inserts, the whole genome can be organized into a limited number of contigs, most often in thousands. For instance, the catfish physical maps had 3,307 contigs and 1,891 contigs. 6, 7 The integrated catfish physical map included over 2,500 contigs (unpublished). Integration of physical maps and whole-genome sequence contigs allows the relationship to be established between the sequence-based contigs and the restriction fingerprint-based contigs, thereby reducing the levels of segmentation of the genome. One of the major applications of genetic linkage map is to integrate physical maps and wholegenome assemblies. Integration of genetic map with physical map is useful for understanding genomes from different dimensions and is essential for comparative genome analysis, 8 fine-scale QTL mapping and positional cloning of genes responsible for performance and production traits. 9, 10 In aquaculture fish species, genetic maps have been constructed in a few species, such as Asian seabass, 11 Atlantic salmon, 12 half-smooth tongue sole, 13 rainbow trout, 14 common carp, 15 and catfish. 2, 9, 16, 17 These maps harbour several hundred to a couple of thousands of markers, with which QTL for agriculturally important performance and production traits can only be mapped in large genomic regions. Integrated maps have been developed in several aquaculture fish species using low-density genetic maps. In Atlantic salmon, in addition to 579 BAC contigs that were integrated into the linkage map using microsatellite markers, identification and mapping of new BAC-anchored single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers from BAC-end sequences placed 73 additional BAC contigs to Atlantic salmon linkage groups. 18 The second generation of rainbow trout integrated map anchored up to 265 contigs to the genetic map, covering ∼11% of the genome. 10 In common carp, a total of 463 physical map contigs and 88 single BACs were integrated into the genetic linkage map, which covered 30% of the common carp genome. 15 In catfish, 2,030 BAC-end sequence (BES)-derived microsatellites from 1,481 physical map contigs were used for linkage map construction, which anchored 44.8% of the catfish BAC physical map contigs, covering ∼52.8% of the genome. 9 Apparently, the level of integration is dependent on the density and resolution of the genetic maps. One objective of this study was to construct a high-density and high-resolution genetic linkage map by using a large number of molecular markers, covering the entire genome and a large resource panel for linkage mapping analysis. In addition to this primary goal, a secondary goal was to increase integration of the linkage and physical maps, using markers derived from BECs for genetic linkage analysis. Our previous genetic linkage analysis used mostly microsatellite markers. In spite of their high polymorphism, and low cost of single marker genotyping, an analysis of tens of thousands of microsatellites with a large number of mapping fish is extremely labourious and costprohibitive. SNPs overcome these difficulties by providing high efficiency and low-cost, large-scale genotyping. SNPs have become markers of choice because of their abundance, even genomic distribution, and easy adaptation to automation. 19 Recent advances in NGS have allowed rapid discovery of genome-wide SNPs in any organism in a cost-effective manner. 20 With the availability of large numbers of SNPs, high-density SNP array platform can be developed for high-throughput and efficient genotyping. Alternatively, an NGS-based genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) [19] [20] [21] is also highly efficient. SNP arrays and GBS have both been used to genotype large-scale SNPs for genetic mapping and association analyses. 12, [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] Compared with GBS, SNP arrays are more costeffective. In addition, they provide a greater level of genome coverage. For instance, in most cases, the total number of commonly analysed SNPs is limited to several thousands while millions of SNPs can be analysed by using very high-density SNP arrays. In addition, GBS of large resource panels for high-resolution maps is cost-prohibitive. Channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus, is the primary aquaculture species in the United States. Since the initiation of genome research over two decades ago, several genetic maps have been constructed with different types of molecular markers and various resource families. 2, 9, 16, 17 Up to date, the highest density map was developed to contain 2,030 microsatellites and 100 SNPs. 9 Although this genetic map has been very useful for genetic and genomic analysis, 29, 30 marker density in this map was still fairly low and only facilitated integration to the physical map for ∼52% of catfish genome. Recently, following efforts to expand catfish genomic resources, we have identified millions of SNPs in channel catfish 31, 32 and developed high-density SNP arrays, 33 which provided the opportunity to develop a high-density and high-resolution SNP-based genetic map. Here we report the construction of genetic linkage map with over 50,000 SNPs in channel catfish, which is, to the best of our knowledge, the highest density genetic map for any aquaculture species. Along with the high density of markers, the utilization of BAC-associated SNPs also allowed significant increase of the integration of the genetic linkage map with the BAC-based physical map in catfish, allowing over 90% of the catfish genome physical map contigs to be mapped to linkage groups. This genetic map should serve as a valuable framework for validating the reference whole-genome sequences, extensive comparative and functional genomic studies, and fine-scale QTL mapping and association studies in catfish.

A total of 576 fish, with 192 full-sibling individuals from each of three full-sibling channel catfish families, were used for linkage mapping. The parent and grandparent samples were also obtained. All DNAs for these samples used in this study were provided by USDA-ARS Warmwater Aquaculture Research Unit, which were prepared following the procedures as previously described.
Genotyping was conducted by GeneSeek (Lincoln, NE, USA) using the catfish 250K SNP array. 33 Affymetrix CEL files were analysed using Affymetrix Genotyping Console software (version 4.0) for quality control analysis and SNP genotype calling using the Affymetrix AxiomGT1 algorithm. Samples passing the quality control (Dish value > 0.85) and SNP call rates threshold (>95%) were retained for analysis. Following genotyping, an R package, SNPolisher, was used to generate the genotyping outputs. The package produced SNP quality control metrics and divided SNPs into several classes based on the quality of genotype calls. 33 The polymorphic markers with high resolution of cluster separation (high genotyping quality) were remained for further analysis. The CHP files generated from the Affymetrix Genotyping Console were imported into SNP & Variation Suite (SVS version 7, Golden Helix, Inc.) for further filtering to remove SNPs with missing genotypes >10% and minor allele frequency <5%.
Only SNPs that had high quality of genotype calls and were heterozygous in at least one parent were retained for linkage analysis. Based on segregation patterns, SNPs were categorized into three types: 1 : 2 : 1 type (AB × AB, segregating in both parents), 1 : 1 type (AB × AA or AB × BB, segregating only in female), and 1 : 1 type (AA × AB or BB × AB, segregating only in male). The χ 2 goodness-of-fit tests were performed to examine the segregation distortion. Markers with significant segregation distortion were excluded (P < 0.001). Linkage maps were initially developed independently for the three mapping families. Sex-specific maps were constructed for each parent using 1 : 1 segregation-type markers only (AB × AA or AB × BB for female map and AA × AB or BB × AB for male map). The markers of segregation type 1 : 2 : 1 (AB × AB) were used to build the sex-averaged map. The LINKMFEX software (version 2.4, http://www.uoguelph.ca/ rdanzman/software.htm) was used to perform linkage analysis for sex-specific markers, and OneMap (R package, version 2.0) was used for linkage analysis of sex-averaged markers. Linkage between markers was examined by estimating logarithm of the odds (LOD) scores for recombination fraction (θ). A LOD threshold of 8.0 was used, and a maximum θ of 0.35 was set to assign markers into linkage groups.
For markers falling into 'zero recombination clusters', only one marker was picked that had the most informative meiosis as the representative marker of each cluster for linkage map construction to reduce the power required for computation of linkage. Genetic maps were constructed using JoinMap software version 4.0 with the regression mapping algorithm. 34 The Kosambi mapping function was used to convert the recombination frequencies into map distances (centiMorgans). The positions of markers were determined according to the sequential buildup of the map. 35 Briefly, a pair of markers was firstly selected, followed by sequential addition of other markers. The 'ripple' was performed each time after adding one marker. The best fitting position of the added markers was searched based on the goodness-of-fit test for the resulting map. When a marker generated a negative map distance or a large 'jump' value in goodness-of-fit test, the marker was removed, and map calculation was continued to construct a first-round map. Thereafter, the removed markers were added to the first-round map and again subjected to the goodness-of-fit test to generate an optimum order of markers. For the sex-specific markers, the linkage phases were inferred automatically, while for the markers with 1 : 2 : 1 segregation type (AB × AB), the linkage phase was deduced based on the genotypes of grandparents to assist the map construction. The consensus maps were then established using the MergeMap 36 by integrating individual maps from three reference families through shared markers. Lastly, the markers falling into 'zero recombination clusters' that were excluded during map construction were anchored to the linkage map, based on the positions of their corresponding representative markers. All genetic linkage maps were drawn using MAP-CHART 2.2. 37 
To assess differences in recombination rates among the three resource families, the sex-averaged map was used following the M-test according to Ott's method.
where Z i ðθ i Þ represents the LOD scores of maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE) for the ith reference family for common marker pairs among the three families. The ZðθÞ represents the total LOD scores of MLE for all three families. The recombination fractions for all mapped locus intervals from each family were obtained from JoinMap.
To investigate sex-specific heterogeneity throughout each linkage group, common marker pairs were used to compare the locus intervals across the male-specific map and female-specific map using contingency G-test. 39 
To integrate previously developed physical map 40 with the highdensity linkage map constructed in the present work, all the mapped SNPs with 70-bp flanking sequences were aligned with BES 8, 40 and BAC-based physical map contig-specific sequences (PMCSS) 41 using
BLAST with the E-value cut-off 1E−10, minimal alignment length of 36, and minimal identity of 95%. The relationship of physical map and genetic map was built up based on the SNP-associated BES and PMCSS. The BAC physical map contigs that harboured BACderived BES and PMCSS were anchored onto the genetic map based on the SNP positions.

As summarized in Table 1 , SNP genotypes were obtained from 576 samples of three mapping families (192 samples per family). According to the assessment of genotyping quality and polymorphism in all samples from the three mapping families, genotypes of a total of 121,521 SNPs were used (Table 1 ). Owing to the low genotype calling rate (<95%), nine individuals were excluded for analysis, including one individual from family 1, three individuals from family 2, and five individuals from family 3. After further filtering to remove SNPs with low calling rate (<97%) and non-Mendelian inheritance (P < 0.001), 
Linkage maps were first constructed for each of the three families, separately. For all three mapping families, 29 linkage groups (LGs) were obtained, which was consistent with the number of chromosomes of the catfish haploid genome. The consensus genetic linkage maps were obtained by merging separate maps from three mapping families. A total of 31,387 markers with distinct genetic positions (hereafter referred to as unique markers) were placed on the consensus linkage maps, which included 8,644 SNPs from family 1, 13,477 SNPs from family 2, and 14,343 SNPs from family 3 ( Table 2 ). After anchoring the previously excluded markers that fell into 'zero recombination clusters' based on the genetic positions of representative markers, a total of 54,342 SNP markers were placed onto the current linkage map ( Table 2) . The sex-specific maps were constructed using markers that were heterozygous in only female or male parent. The female genetic map consisted of 18,444 SNPs including 9,746 unique markers, with a total genetic length of 4,495.1 cM (Table 3; Fig. 1 Fig. 2 ). It should be noted that these distances refer to intervals where recombination was detected and of course it should be recognized that in both sexes, the minimum distance observed was 0 cM for completely linked markers. The female-and male-specific maps are illustrated in Figs 1 and 2 , respectively. The detailed map information was provided in Supplementary data S1.
The sex-averaged map was constructed using markers that were heterozygous in both parents. As summarized in Table 4 , a total of 29,081 SNPs were mapped, which consisted of 15,598 unique markers. The sex-averaged map spanned 3,505.4 cM with an average marker interval of 0.22 cM, ranging from 0.17 cM/marker (LG12) to 0.30 cM/marker (LG18). The genetic map is illustrated in Fig. 3 . The detailed map information was provided in Supplementary data S1.
Within each linkage group, mild to strong localized specific recombination patterns were observed, whereby recombination rates were usually elevated towards the end and suppressed in the middle of the map (Fig. 4) . Clustered markers that fell into 'zero recombination rate' were observed in every linkage group, especially in positions close to the centromeres in contrast to the telomeres (Supplementary data S1).
There is no significant difference in recombination rate among three mapping families based on the examination with common marker pairs among the three families (see Methods section). In contrast, significant higher recombination rates were observed in a majority of the linkage groups of the female genetic map than that of male genetic map (P < 0.01). Overall, the female genetic map was 1,901.4 cM longer than male genetic map, with an average female-to-male ratio of 1.7 : 1 ( Table 3 ). The ratio varied by linkage groups, ranging from 0.97 : 1 in LG22 to 2.50 : 1 in LG1 (Table 3 ). The largest differences in recombination rate between the female and male maps were observed in LG1, LG5, LG7, LG18, LG27, and LG29. Across all these linkage groups, the female : male recombination ratios exceeded 2.0.
LG22 was unusual in that recombination rates were very similar between the sexes (i.e. 0.97 : 1). Within unique map positions, 504 SNPs were commonly shared between the two sexes, while significantly higher recombination rates were observed in majority of the common locus intervals (P < 0.01) (Fig. 5) .
The integration of the genetic map with the BAC-based physical map anchored 2,728 (83%) of the 3,307 physical map contigs (Table 5) . Together with the 1,481 (44.8%) physical map contigs that were anchored previously, 6 we were able to anchor a total of 2,880 (87.1%) physical map contigs consisting of 28,416 BAC clones (92.9% of total BAC clones). The sizes of anchored physical map contigs varied from 66.0 kb to 2,005.8 kb (Supplementary data S2) , with an average size of 301 kb. Together, a total of 867.4 Mb of the physical map was integrated by genetic linkage map that accounted for ∼90% of the channel catfish genome (Table 5 ). Detailed information regarding integration of linkage map and physical map is provided in Supplementary data S2.
The integration of linkage map and physical map enabled the cross-validation of the quality of the physical map and the genetic map (Table 6 ). A total of 1,467 physical map contigs containing 2,961 BES-associated SNPs were placed onto linkage maps. With 615 physical map contigs, two or more SNP markers were mapped that allowed the determination of orientation of the physical map contigs along the chromosome. With such contigs, the quality of physical map contigs was assessed based on the mapped markers. An illustration with linkage group 12 is provided in Fig. 6 . The vast majority of physical contigs were validated, but a small fraction of physical map contigs was found incorrectly assembled, or the ordering of the SNP markers onto the map was in error.
A total of 47 physical map contigs had markers that were mapped in different linkage groups, indicating the potential errors of the physical map assembly or the mapping errors of incorrectly assigned SNPs. These errors could be caused by SNPs falling into duplicated regions of genome. Moreover, of the 2,707 BAC clones with BES-associated SNPs, 238 BAC clones contained at least two BES-associated SNPs. Within this group, 7 BAC clones were mapped onto different LGs, suggesting the misplacement of those SNP markers onto the linkage groups. As an illustration, the integration of sex-averaged linkage map with physical map Contig72 and Contig534 is shown in Fig. 7 , presenting the correct and incorrect physical map assembly, respectively. The manual check of the potential assembly or mapping error warrants the correctness of both physical map and linkage map in the next step.
Physical distances were estimated based on the position of SNP markers within each physical map contig, which allowed for estimation of the ratios of physical distance to genetic distance (Supplementary data S3). On the other hand, recombination frequencies can be calculated for physical map contigs with multiple SNP markers mapped onto the linkage map. With the sex-averaged linkage map, the genetic size of 3,505.4 cM and the physical size of 965,279 kb based on the physical map, we estimated the average genetic size as 3.6 cM per Mb. The ratios observed from the 250 physical map contigs that contained multiple SNPs mapped onto the linkage map ranged from 0 to 2.26 cM per Mb. The markers with higher ratios might indicate the potential loci of recombination hot spots.
In this work, we constructed a high-density genetic map for channel catfish. This map possesses the highest marker density among all the 
High-density and high-resolution catfish genetic map genetic linkage maps constructed for any aquaculture species. Taking advantage of the catfish 250K SNP array, we were able to efficiently and cost-effectively genotype 250,000 SNPs in the 576 fish from three mapping families (192 fish per family). Such a high-density linkage map should be a valuable resource for analysis and fine-scale QTL mapping in catfish. Although the efficient SNP genotyping technology allowed the construction of high-density linkage map, the high-resolution was yet to be achieved. A large number of markers fell into 'zero recombination clusters' where no recombination events occur during meiosis between the markers among the fish used for mapping analysis. These represent closely arrayed adjacent SNP positions, and their ordering is likely best achieved by assessing their order within the aligned physical map contigs. Conversely, it was also observed that genetic recombination rates could be artificially inflated when genotyping errors occur or when markers with large amounts of missing data are included in the analysis. 42, 43 Similar situations were observed previously in zebrafish during the construction of high-density genetic map. In zebrafish, the genetic sizes of initial map were over 1,000 cM per chromosome. After removal of genotyping errors, the genetic sizes were reduced to around 100 cM. 44 To reduce the effect of clustered markers on the map construction and reduce the computing load, we picked one representative anchor marker that had the most informative meiosis from each of these clusters in the linkage map construction. Afterwards, we rejoined the markers within the 'zero recombination clusters' that were excluded during the initial mapping steps. This procedure relocated the informative markers onto the linkage maps based on the positions of their representative anchor marker. Such clustered markers are still valuable for the chromosome-scale scaffolding.
With the availability of such high-density mapped SNPs, the patterns of marker distribution across chromosomes can be examined. It appears that clustered markers were commonly found in regions around centromeres while less frequently found around the telomeres. This was consistent with observations in various genetic maps previously developed in fish species, such as tilapia, 45 medaka, 46 rainbow trout, 47 Atlantic salmon, 12 and catfish. 9, 16 One potential explanation is that the centromeres contain abundant tandemly repeated, heterochromatic DNA sequences. 48 As shown in Fig. 4 , the distribution of mapped SNP markers across chromosomes in channel catfish is consistent with the observation of telomere and centromere effects, 49 which would result in a higher recombination rate near the telomeres while a lower recombination rate near the centre of the chromosomes. The recombination rates might be positively correlated with GC content, as in human, 50 pig, 51 chicken, 52 rodent, 53 and yeast, 54 or correlated with some other genomic features such as gene density and the presence of genes determining recombination hotspots. The PRDM9 gene was recently found to determine the recombination hotspots in the mammalian genomes. [55] [56] [57] Future investigations on recombination landscape warrant the characterization of genomic features, affecting the meiotic recombination in catfish upon the availability of fully assembled genome sequences. The suppression of recombination in males relative to the females observed in channel catfish (averaged female-to-male ratio is 1.7 : 1) was consistent with our previous observation 2 as well as many other studies. Recombination rates differ between the two sexes in many organisms where recombination occurs more frequently in the homogametic sex than in the heterogametic sex. 50, 58 The similar phenomenon was reported in many other fish species such as Atlantic salmon (1.38 : 1), rainbow trout (1.68 : 1), European sea bass (1.60 : 1), Arctic char (1.69 : 1), and silver carp (1.52 : 1). 12, 14, [58] [59] [60] [61] Striking recombination differences between the sexes were observed in zebrafish (2.74 : 1) 58 and grass carp (2.0 : 1). 62 These observations indicated that even closely related fish species differ in genetic sizes and the extent of sexual dimorphism for recombination fraction, 50 similarly as in mammals. Although the genetic basis for recombination bias between sexes remains unknown, several theories were proposed to explain this observation. One explanation from selection perspective suggests that selection pressure is stronger in male gametes than in Figure 5 . Comparison of the recombination rate between female and male. The inter-marker distances (cM) for all pairs of adjacent markers from both femaleand male-specific maps were used. The diagonal line represents sex-equal recombination rates.
female gametes during the haploid life stage. This difference could lead to male-specific selection to maintain beneficial haplotype to decrease the male recombination rate. 58, 63 An alternative explanation is that the female recombination rate is higher to compensate for the apparently less stringent checkpoint for achiasmatic chromosomes compared with males. 50 In human, cytological studies suggested that sex-specific differences in recombination may derive from chromatin differences established prior to the onset of the recombination pathway. 64 The high-density and the relatively high-resolution genetic map provides valuable resource for integrating the physical map and whole-genome assemblies. In this study, we anchored the catfish physical map to genetic linkage map through BES and PMCSS that contain SNP markers. With this linkage map of channel catfish, we were able to anchor 87% of the catfish BAC physical map contigs, covering ∼92% of the catfish genome. This is a great improvement on map integration compared with our previous efforts that only anchored 44.8% of the catfish BAC physical map contigs accounting for 52.8% of the catfish genome. To our knowledge, this is also the highest percentage of physical maps integration with genetic maps that were obtained in any aquaculture species. The well-integrated map is useful for comprehensive comparative genomic analyses, fine-scale mapping of QTL, and positional cloning for candidate genes. 10 Moreover, the integrated map can be used as an important resource for the validation of the catfish whole-genome assembly.
Aerococcus sanguinicola is a cause of urinary tract infections, blood stream infections, and infective endocarditis (IE) [1] [2] [3] . Since it was designated as a species in 2001 [4] , only a few cases of A sanguinicola bacteremia have been reported [4, 5] and only 1 case series, describing 6 patients, addresses the clinical presentation of such infection and has been published [2] . More cases of invasive infections with Aerococcus urinae have been previously described [6, 7] . From urinary samples, A sanguinicola and A urinae are isolated at similar frequencies [1, 2, 8] . Aerococci share features with other Gram-positive bacteria; they appear in clusters or tetrads as staphylococci, but they have similar colony morphology as α-hemolytic streptococci and are catalase negative. Aerococcal species are not easily distinguishable from each other when using conventional methods based on biochemistry [9] . Importantly, A sanguinicola is consistently being identified as Aerococcus viridans by several commercially available systems such as Vitek 2, API strep, and ID 32 [1, 8] . The misidentification of A sanguinicola in clinical microbiology laboratories has likely led to an underestimation of the incidence and the clinical importance of this species. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) has recently been showed to be a fast and reliable method for identification and correct species determination of aerococci including A sanguinicola [8, 10] . Aerococcus sanguinicola is sensitive to most antibiotics likely to be used for empirical treatment of septicaemia such as β-lactams and vancomycin [5] . However, A sanguinicola has often reduced susceptibility to fluoroquinolones [1, 3, 5] . High-level fluoroquinolone resistance has also been described [11] . Aerococcus urinae has been shown to form biofilm on plastic surfaces in vitro and to activate human platelets [12] . It is not known whether A sanguinicola also possess these potential virulence traits. The aim with this study was to investigate the incidence of A sanguinicola bacteremia in the south of Sweden and to describe the clinical presentation of such infections. Moreover, the antibiotic susceptibility and some virulence properties of the isolates were determined.

Isolates were identified by searching the databases of the 2 clinical microbiology laboratories belonging to University and Regional Laboratories of Skåne, Sweden. These laboratories are located in Malmö and Lund and serve all hospitals in a region with ∼1.2 million inhabitants. Searches were performed among all isolates from blood cultures drawn between March 2006 and November 2012. Both laboratories used the BacT/Alert blood culture system (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France), and Gram stains were used to provide preliminary identification. Growth of catalase-negative bacteria, with colony appearance resembling α-hemolytic streptococci, in more than 1 bottle resulted routinely in species identification by sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene in Lund (2006 Lund ( -2011 or by Vitek2 (bioMér-ieux) in Malmö (2006 Malmö ( -2011 . Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry was introduced in both laboratories in 2011 and was the primary method of species identification during 2011-2012. Bacterial isolates were stored at −80 o C. All isolates of A sanguinicola were subjected to sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene [13] to confirm species identity. Reclassification of older isolates from the same time period (2006-2012) was carried out with MALDI-TOF MS, as described in Senneby et al [8] . Reclassification was performed if growth was identified in more than 1 bottle and the isolates had been identified as A viridans by Vitek 2, or isolates that had been identified as α-hemolytic streptococci or Gram-positive coccus, although preliminary Gram stain had been interpreted as Gram-positive cocci in clusters. The local research ethical committee approved this study (registration number 2010/681).
The medical chart of each patient was reviewed to extract clinical presentation, underlying conditions, treatment, and outcome. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) was determined as described previously [14] , and organ dysfunction caused by the infection was classified according to the Swedish Society of Infectious Diseases' guidelines as described by Senneby et al [7] .
The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for penicillin, cefotaxime, vancomycin, clindamycin, gentamicin, and ciprofloxacin was determined by the use of Etests (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France) according to the manufacturers' instructions. Muller Hinton agar, supplemented with 5% horse blood, was used and MICs were determined after incubation for 24 hours at 35°C in 5% CO 2 .
Isolates were cultivated overnight in tryptic soy broth (Difco) with 0.5% glucose at 37°C with 5% CO 2 , and biofilm was determined using crystal violet as described by Holmberg [15] with modifications as described previously [16] . The experiment was repeated 3 times. Medium alone was used as negative control. The negative control absorbance values were subtracted from the isolates' absorbance values in each experiment. A strain of Enterococcus faecalis, known to be a potent biofilm producer, was used for positive control. Heparinized plasma was obtained by centrifugation of blood from a healthy donor at 1500 g for 10 minutes.
Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and platelet-poor plasma were prepared from 3 healthy donors as described by Rasmussen et al [17] . Bacterial concentration was set as described [12] , and platelet aggregation was determined by aggregometry as described by Rasmussen et al [17] . Soluble collagen was used as positive control.

From the laboratory in Lund, 7 isolates of A sanguinicola were identified. Three isolates had already been identified through sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene, 2 isolates were originally identified as α-hemolytic streptococci, and 2 isolates had been identified with MALDI-TOF MS. Four isolates were retrieved in the Malmö laboratory. One isolate had been misidentified as A urinae by Vitek2, and 3 isolates were correctly identified by MALDI-TOF MS. Altogether, 11 A sanguinicola isolates were identified and confirmed through sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene. In 10 cases, A sanguinicola was found in more than 1 culture (only 1 blood culture was taken in 1 case). In 5 patients, A sanguinicola was the only organism isolated whereas 6 patients had additional pathogens isolated from their blood ( Table 1) . Abbreviations: Am, amoxicillin; Amp, ampicillin; BC, bladder cancer; BPH, benign prostate hyperplasia; Cf, cefuroxime; Ct, cefotaxime; CHF, congestive heart failure; Ci, ciprofloxacin; Cm, clindamycin; Coa, coagulation dysfunction; Con, confusion; CoNS, coagulase negative staphylococcus; Ct, cefotaxime; CVI, cerebrovascular insult with sequelae; DM2, diabetes mellitus type 2; Fe, fever; Gm, gentamicin; Hep, hepatic dysfunction; HP, hypoperfusion; HT, hypotension; ICU, intensive care unit; IE, infectious endocarditis; IHD, ischaemic heart disease; M, male; Me, meropenem; Met, metronidazole; Ni, nitrofurantoine; PC, prostate cancer; PcG, penicillin G; PcV, penicillin V; Pt, piperacillin-tazobactam; Ren, renal dysfunction; Resp, respiratory dysfunction; Ru, residual urine; UC, urinary catheter; UTI, urinary tract infection; Va, vancomycin.
* The SIRS criteria are expressed as number of criteria met through the total number of criteria given in the medical records. The commas indicate changes of antibiotic treatment, and a plus indicates a combined treatment.
A sanguinicola Bacteremia and Virulence • OFID • 3
None of the 11 patients had recorded growth of A sanguinicola in a urinary culture. In 5 patients, no urinary culture was performed and 3 patients had sterile urine. In 2 patients, the urine grew more than 2 species that were not further characterized, and in 1 patient Pseudomonas aeruginosa was identified in the urine culture.
The clinical presentation is summarized in Table 1 . All patients were male and the median age was 82 years (range, 67-93). Six patients had underlying urinary tract diseases; prostatic malignancy (n = 3), bladder malignancy (n = 1), or benign prostatic hyperplasia (n = 2). Eight of the 11 patients had an indwelling urinary tract catheter. Five patients suffered from Alzheimer's disease or other types of dementia, and another 2 patients had memory impairment. One patient had Trisomy 21. None of the patients was treated with immunosuppressive medications. At presentation in the hospital, 9 patients were febrile. Hematuria was an initial symptom in 5 patients, 1 patient had complains of back pain, and 1 patient had obstruction of his urinary catheter. Ten patients fulfilled the criteria for SIRS and 9 of them had signs of organ dysfunction, most commonly renal failure (n = 8). Thus, 10 patients fulfilled criteria for sepsis and 9 fulfilled criteria for severe sepsis. One patient had septic shock. Nine patients recovered from their infections and 2 patients died at hospital (after 24 h and 15 days of care, respectively). The nonsurvivors were both terminally ill with cancer. The median duration of the hospital stay was 12 days (range, 6-61) for the surviving patients.
Two of the 11 patients were diagnosed with IE according to Duke's criteria for IE [18] . In 1 case, a 68-year-old man with Trisomy 21 presented with fatigue and fever. The patient had no history of cardiac anomalies. A heart murmur was noted for the first time upon clinical examination, and a transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) visualized a suspected vegetation on the mitral valve. After initial empiric treatment with a broadspectrum cephalosporin, the patient received penicillin for 1 month in combination with gentamicin the first week and recovered without complications. One year later, the patient was treated for suspected recurrent IE due to fever and elevated levels of C-reactive protein. However, in the second episode no bacteria were isolated from the blood. The other case was an 85-year-old man with prostatic cancer, but with no medical history of cardiac disease, who was admitted to the intensive care unit due to fever, respiratory failure, and septic shock. Twice, a TEE was performed without conclusive evidence of IE. However, the aortic valve was too sclerotic to safely disregard the possibility of IE. This patient received penicillin for 1 month in combination with gentamicin the first week and recovered from the infection.
The MICs for tested antibiotics are presented in Table 2 . The results are in line with previous reports [1, 3, 5] with the bacteria displaying low MICs for penicillin, cefotaxime, and vancomycin. We observed high MICs for ciprofloxacin (range, 4->32 mg/L). The cefotaxime MICs for the isolates from the 2 patients who died at hospital were 0.125 mg/L and 2 mg/L. All 11 patients received empirical treatment with broad-spectrum β-lactam antibiotic. In 5 cases, this treatment was shifted to intravenous penicillin. Four patients were given gentamycin in combination with penicillin or cefotaxime. As follow-up oral treatment, penicillin or ampicillin were most commonly used, followed by ciprofloxacin. The median treatment length with intravenous antibiotics was 9 days (range, 2-36 days) and the median total treatment length was 14 days (range, 2-36 days).
All 11 clinical isolates produced biofilms that were firmly attached to the plastic surface and visible to the eye after 24, 48, and 72 hours. There was a variation in the amount of absorbed crystal violet between the isolates, indicating a difference in the capacity to form biofilm ( Figure 1 ). For 4 isolates, there was a statistically significant increase in the amount of biofilm formed in the presence of plasma compared to the amount of biofilm formed in medium alone (Mann-Whitney U test; P < .05) at 48 hours. At 72 hours, the same comparison resulted in a significant difference for 7 of the 11 isolates (Figure 1 ).
The 11 isolates were tested for their capacity to aggregate human platelets from 3 donors. Three isolates failed to induce platelet aggregation in any donor, 2 isolates induced aggregation of platelets from 1 donor, 5 isolates induced aggregation in 2 donors, and 1 isolate induced aggregation of platelets from all 3 donors. The median time to aggregation for all isolates was 12 minutes (range, 8-24 min). The isolate that induced aggregation from all 3 donors was from one of the patients with IE. The other patients with IE had an isolate that induced aggregation after 8 minutes in 2 donors.
Only a few clinical cases of bacteremia with A sanguinicola have been previously presented [2] , and in this study we report an additional 11 cases. The scarcity of reports could be explained by the fact that the bacterium was quite recently designated its own species and that it is easily misidentified as A viridans. Because MALDI-TOF MS is a reliable method of identifying A sanguinicola and A urinae [8, 10] , the introduction of this method in clinical microbiology laboratories will lead to a more accurate identification of aerococcal species and also a better determination of the incidence of these infections. Our study was carried out retrospectively and may have underestimated the actual number of cases with blood stream infections caused by A sanguinicola. Based on our data, the estimated incidence is 1.4 cases per 1 000 000 inhabitants per year. In our material, all patients were elderly men and a majority of them had underlying urological conditions or an indwelling urinary catheter. Neurological disorders were common, 5 patients had some form of dementia, and 1 patient had Trisomy 21. Similar findings were presented by Ibler et al [2] . Four of their 6 patients were of male gender, and all of them had neurological conditions, including 1 patient with Trisomy 21. It is interesting to note that both of the patients with this genetic disorder were diagnosed with IE. Aerococcus urinae, which has been more extensively studied, also infects elderly men with urinary tract abnormalities, but patients with A urinae bacteremia seem to have less neurological disease [7] . Most patients in our study presented fever as a primary symptom of infection, and several had complaints or symptoms from the urinary tract. Aerococcus sanguinicola is most commonly encountered in urinary cultures, and most studies suggest that it has a pathogenic capacity in the urinary tract [1, 3] . Taken together, this result implies that the primary focus of blood stream infections with A sanguinicola is most likely the urinary tract. However, we could not find support for this speculation in our material because no aerococci were isolated from urinary cultures. This result could partly be explained by shortcomings in the clinical management of these patients upon arrival at hospital and possibly also failure to recognize the bacteria in urinary cultures. Ten patients fulfilled the criteria for SIRS and 9 of them had organ dysfunction, which points out the severity of bacteremia with A sanguinicola. Two patients did not survive the hospital stay; however, both of these patients were terminally ill with cancer. In both nonsurvivors, A sanguinicola was isolated in pure cultures from blood. In our hospitals, the fatality of A sanguinicola (2 of 11) is similar to that of A urinae (1 of 16) [7] , although the small number of cases does not permit any definite conclusions. The pathogenic role of A sanguinicola in the 6 patients with polymicrobial bacteremia is less clear, and some of these patients had bacteremia with bacteria of relatively high pathogenic potential such as Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus. Notably, none of the patients with polymicrobial bacteremia succumbed, and consequently the case fatality in bacteremia with A sanguinicola in pure culture was 2 of 5 in this material. Two of the 11 patients were diagnosed with IE, and in an additional 3 patients a TTE was performed, making the possibility of IE in those patients less likely. Thus, in 6 patients, the possibility of IE was not investigated by diagnostic echocardiography and potential IEs could have been missed. Ibler et al [2] reported that 2 of 6 patients had IE, and we have previously reported that 3 of 16 patients with A urinae bacteremia had IE [7] . We find it reasonable to asses all cases of aerococcal bacteremia with diagnostic echocardiography. In our experiment, the 11 clinical isolates of A sanguinicola were all biofilm producers, which probably could facilitate the colonization of indwelling urinary catheters. For most isolates, the biofilm after 72 hours was more pronounced in the presence of human plasma, which indicates that the bacteria could also form biofilm in a situation where plasma exudates due to local inflammation. For S aureus [19, 20] and Propionibacterium acnes [15] , serum or plasma inhibit biofilm formation, but in A urinae, biofilm formation is strongly stimulated by human plasma [12] . The mechanisms behind plasma effects on bacterial biofilm formation remains to be explored, but the fact that aerococci can form biofilm in the presence of plasma supports the possibility that biofilm formation could have a role in IE caused by aerococci. It is interesting to note that the isolates from the 2 patients with IE induced aggregation in PRP from 2 or 3 donors, respectively. These patients had predisposing factors for IE, but it could support the theory that induction of platelet aggregation is to be considered as a virulence property of aerococci [21] . In conclusion, our study shows that A sanguinicola can cause severe infections in elderly men with urinary tract abnormalities and neurological diseases and that the bacterium has virulence mechanisms of potential importance in IE.

Training competent physicians is, in many ways, a matter of trust. Patients trust providers to competently address their ailments and assist in helping them achieve good health. Accreditation organizations trust that graduate medical education (GME) programs implement policies and procedures to prepare graduates to provide highly competent medical care. GME programs that utilize competency committees trust these groups to make accurate decisions regarding trainee progress. Trust as a core concept is growing in prevalence in the broader education literature and more recently has been discussed in health professions education, but is the nature of trust in each of these contexts the same?
Health professions education has examined trust in the context of Entrustable Professional Activities (EPAs), which include decisions that supervisors make about the appropriate level of trainee supervision for different clinical responsibilities [1, 2] . While such individual decisions of trust are important, group decisions regarding trainee competence are critical. In some countries, competency committees are an essential part of the postgraduate medical education program. These committees usually consist of training program faculty who collectively determine which trainees are on appropriate paths towards unsupervised clinical practice and which are not. They assess each trainee's progress, and they make recommendations to program directors regarding trainee overall progress, promotion, and remediation [3] [4] [5] . Given the high-stakes decisions shouldered by competency committees, trust is a critical component of these group decisions.
Although some recent studies describe data sources that competency committees use and how this information may impact their collective decisions [6, 7] , health professions education research has not studied trust within these committees and trust in committee decisions from individuals either within or outside the group. Scholars outside of medicine have explored trust at the individual level and also at the group level (e.g. in work teams) [8] [9] [10] . Even within a group, research suggests that trust occurs at multiple levels encompassing both individual level and group level processes simultaneously [8] . For purposes of this review, we define a group as "a collection of individuals who have regular contact and frequent interaction, mutual influence, common feeling of camaraderie, and who work together to achieve a common set of goals." [11] Research on group trust has focused primarily on trust within a group (e.g. as an aggregate or combination of individual trust) as opposed to trust in group decisions from individuals either within or outside of the group. However, "group trust" in any of these contexts has not been clearly defined. Defining trust in group settings is important to informing and potentially improving how competency committees and other groups make collective decisions; proposing a model illustrating various components of group trust may also help such committees implement a more effective and meaningful decision process regarding trainee competence.
The purpose of this scoping review is to examine the definition of trust in the context of group decisions and propose a definition of group trust. Additionally, we examine what factors may influence group trust through a proposed model to illustrate the relationship between individual level and group level trust.
In order for decision-making groups to achieve consensus, communication and interactions between people, objects (i.e. items that help augment human capabilities in a learning or task-oriented setting, such as learning management systems), and the environment are believed to be important. We therefore chose situated cognition as our theoretical framework to support the development of a model and interpretation of the literature, helping to advance our understanding of group processes in the context of competency committees. Situated cognition proposes that thinking and learning are situated (or located) within the larger social and physical context of the environment [12] . This theory suggests that a group setting is highly complex with multiple components (i.e. physical, social, and cultural) and opportunities for interactions between these components. It recognizes the complex relationship between participants, objects (i.e. artifacts) that help to augment individuals' cognitive capabilities, and the environment. Situated cognition emphasizes how these various interactions lead to thinking, learning, and decisions, and the model we propose in this review is built upon all of these interactions.
We chose a scoping review to understand how trust operates in groups making collective decisions and to support the development of a model using situated cognition that can be tested empirically in future studies. This scoping review was conducted based upon the methodology originally outlined by Arksey and O'Malley and expanded upon by Levac et al. [13, 14] We initially reviewed the broad literature on trust at the individual, group, and organizational levels. During this initial review, we identified a multilevel model of trust in work teams from outside of health professions education that we used as a framework to guide our subsequent search and analysis [8] . Recognizing that the medical literature is narrow for this particular subject and the potential benefits of including what is known about trust in group settings from other fields, we chose to expand our search to include other disciplines that involve similar groups (e.g. committees and juries).
With the assistance of a medical librarian, we conducted a search in MEDLINE, ERIC, PsycINFO, and SCOPUS in April 2018 (our specific search strategy is shown in Supplemental Digital Appendix). We did not limit the publication dates of our searches, but the results were limited to English-language articles.
The research team reviewed titles and abstracts using the following initial inclusion criteria: original research or review articles; "trust" referenced in the title; and articles that included information about a group, team, committee, or similar collection of individuals. Articles were excluded if they did not meet the inclusion criteria above. We also excluded articles for the following reasons: the word "trust" was used in a different context (e.g. trust fund); trust was a narrow focus of the article; no clear link to group processes or dynamics; the link between trust and a group was not clear; the article referenced only virtual groups; and articles from the computer science, information technology, and economics fields. Articles were excluded from these three fields because we felt that the context in which they utilized trust was not applicable to decision-making groups. The research team met regularly and came to complete consensus during this step of the process.
A data extraction sheet was modeled after a sensitizing framework in a recently published review of trust in teams outside of medicine and our initial review of the trust literature (See Additional file 1) [8] . We extracted definitions of trust along with factors pertaining to trust at the group level and synthesized this information into our primary outcomes: a definition of group trust, factors that influence group trust, and a proposed model to illustrate the relationship between trust at the individual and group levels. Each article was independently coded by two members of the research team. Discrepancies in coding were resolved in regular in-person research team meetings. Figure 1 outlines the review process.
Consistent with revised scoping review methodology recommendations [14] , we obtained consultation from two independent medical educators outside of our research team who have experience with competency committees. We presented them our preliminary findings, and we incorporated their feedback in our final revision of the results.
We identified 406 publications and included 42 articles. The two main reasons for exclusion were that the articles demonstrated no clear link to group dynamics and/or trust was too narrow of a focus (Fig. 1) . A complete list of the 42 included publications is available in Additional file 2. Additionally, a complete list of the excluded publications and the reasons for exclusion are available in Additional files 3, 4, 5, and 6.
Publications were written by 108 unique authors, with 103 (95.4%) contributing once. Twelve countries were represented, and six (14.2%) publications were multi-national collaborations. Five (11.9%) publications involved healthcare work teams. Thirteen (31%) involved undergraduate or graduate students, though none of the included publications focused on health professions education ( Table 1) .
Thirty-four (81%) publications were empirical research studies, seven (16.7%) were literature reviews, and one Fig. 1 Flowchart of inclusion/exclusion determinations (2.4%) was a meta-analysis. Of the empirical publications, all were prospective studies; 85.3% used quantitative methods (n = 29: surveys = 27, scenarios = 2), while the remaining utilized qualitative (n = 2) or mixed (n = 3) methods.
The most often cited general definition of trust by articles in this review (n = 28, 66.7%; almost always referring to trust at the individual level) is the "willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another party based on the [positive] expectation that the other will perform a particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the ability to monitor or control that other party." [15] Other general definitions of trust cited by articles in this study are provided in Table 2 . Positive expectations are beliefs that the actions of another will be beneficial, favorable, or at least not detrimental [26] . Vulnerability implies that there is something of importance to be lost and involves taking a risk; indeed, risk is also a commonly cited component of trust [17, 18, 21, 22, 24, [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] . Thus, because trust in general can be defined as a willingness to be vulnerable to the actions of another party, trust at any level (e.g. individual or group) can arguably be characterized as a measure of how much risk an individual is willing to incur in relationships.
Within a group, trust has been proposed by fields outside of medicine (e.g. management, organizational and social psychology, and higher education) to exist at both the individual and group levels of analysis and that conceptualizations of group trust should include individual trust. However, we were unable to find in this review a clear definition of "group trust."
We propose the following definition of group trust: "a group-directed willingness to accept vulnerability to expectation that the other will perform a particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the ability to monitor or control that other party." [15] "The degree of confidence the members of a team have in the goodwill of its leader, specifically, the extent to which they believe that the leader is honest, sincere, and unbiased in taking their positions into account." [16] "A psychological state that manifests itself in the behaviors towards others, is based on the expectations made upon behaviors of these others, and on the perceived motives and intentions in situations entailing risk for the relationship with those others." [17] "Trust in individuals is an expectation or belief that actions from another party will be motivated by good intentions. Moreover, individuals take a risk in this belief because the other party may not act out of benevolence." [18] "Expectations, assumptions, or beliefs about the likelihood that another's future actions will be beneficial, favorable, or at least not detrimental to one's interests." [19] "A belief (held by an individual or a group) that another individual or group (a) makes good-faith efforts to behave in accordance with any commitments made both explicitly or implicitly, (b) is honest in whatever interactions preceded such commitments, and (c) would not take excessive advantage of another even when the opportunity became available." [20] "The extent to which a person is confident in, and willing to act on the basis of, the words, actions, and decisions of another. Critically, trust requires the presence of uncertainty and risk." [21] "One party's (the trustor) confident expectation that another party (the trustee), on whom the trustor must rely, will help the trustor reach his or her goals in an environment of risk and uncertainty." [22] "The optimistic acceptance of a vulnerable situation in which the truster believes the trustee will care for the truster's interests through the bracketing out of uncertainty. Empirically, we therefore delineate trust in terms of the overlooking of uncertainty and possible negative outcomes based on considerations of the motives and/or competencies of others." [23] "A resolve to bear an experienced risk by confiding in the new and unknown. It goes beyond the blind, unquestioning faith that an infant may have of a parent because there is an acknowledgement of past experience that denotes trust as a risk, especially where there are unknown elements. It is a decision to act in concert with others in anticipation of a return. By placing trust in others, we place ourselves in a position of vulnerability, ceding power. Trust given in the anticipation of reciprocity creates a sense of mutual obligation." [24] "The generalized expectation of predictable and benevolent motives and/or behavior from others." [25] actions of the members based on the expectation that members will perform a particular action important to the group, encompassing social exchange, collective perceptions, and interpersonal trust." Fig. 2 outlines the relationship between individual trust and various characterizations of group trust in the literature, which include the three broad categories mentioned in our definition: individual (sometimes referred to as interpersonal) trust, social exchange, and collective perceptions. At the individual level, interpersonal trust occurs in dyadic relationships between members in the group, encompassing general features of trust outlined above along with characteristics of both the trustor and the trustee. One important difference between individual and group trust is that instead of existing in dyadic relationships, group trust implies that these components of trust are shared among group members [8] . Scholars note that group trust involves each dyadic relationship within the group along with collective perceptions of trust about the group as a distinct unit [34] . Social exchange, which encompasses individual interactions and interdependent group tasks, is thought to help individuals develop shared perceptions, expectations, and behavioral norms with other group members [35] [36] [37] . Moreover, trust at the group level is also felt to be a matter of shared group membership where individuals may be willing to trust other group members to show that the group is important to them and a meaningful part of their identity [38] .
The second aim of our study is to explore specific components of groups that may influence how trust can be conceived to work in health professions education group settings, such as competency committees. We propose a preliminary model (Fig. 3) for various elements of trust pertaining to group decisions. Our model includes individual level factors (encompassing both the trustor and the trustee), group level factors (encompassing both group structure and group processes), environmental factors, and importantly interpersonal interactions, which are a key element in situated cognition and have been cited as crucial for competency committees [39] . Below we outline some of the factors in our proposed model (See corresponding Table 3 for a complete description of all the factors, which includes potential implications for competency committees).
Individual trustor factors Trust between two group members requires looking at one individual as the "trustor" and the other as the "trustee," noting this relationship can be reciprocal with the roles shifting between members. Trustor factors include vulnerability and an individual's propensity to trust, which is believed to vary with people's different experiences, personality types, and cultures [15] . Showing vulnerability has been shown to be crucial for building trusting group relationships as this demonstrates a Fig. 2 Definition of Group Trust willingness to trust other group members and the group itself [23] .
Individual trustee factors The three trustee characteristics most often cited in the literature are ability (a group of skills and competencies in a specific domain), benevolence (the extent to which a trustee is believed to want to do good to a trustor on the giving end of a trusting relationship), and integrity (the trustor's perception that the trustee adheres to a set of principles that the trustor finds acceptable) [15] . In a collective setting, perceived commitment to the group has also been cited as an important individual trait [41] .
Interpersonal interactions are an important component of situated cognition, and effective interactions can lead to improved social exchange and cohesion, both of which have been shown to enhance the development of interpersonal trust, especially in new product development teams and technology-supported decision-making groups [21, 42] . For decision-making groups and top management teams, a shared mental model is important and may be conceptualized as the shared knowledge and organized understanding of the information and resources used by the group, tasks and problems faced by the group, and individual group members' imported information (the preexisting knowledge, stereotypes, preconceptions, and experiences stored in group members' memories) [40, 43] . The idea of a shared mental model is a critical component of competency committees.
While trust between group members is usually felt to enhance information exchange and establish shared understanding, knowledge brought in by new members may adversely affect group collective beliefs and memory structures, especially in well-established groups [42] . Notably, trust can more easily be violated in relationships of shorter rather than longer duration because parties in newly formed relationships are less likely to have had the opportunity to develop mutual understanding and respect [33] . Additionally, a person's standing in the group, which refers to a person's inclusion or membership status within a group, may influence how more senior or experienced members interact with newer ones [38] .

Regarding a group's composition, diversity amongst members can have multiple influences on trust within the group. Diversity in this context includes both cultural and skill diversity. In undergraduate psychology students, trust was demonstrated to more likely develop in groups when members perceive each other to have similar attitudes, personality, and intellect than in dissimilar groups [22] . Cultural diversity may, in some contexts, negatively impact group performance and communication effectiveness [40] . However, in contrast to cultural diversity, skill diversity has been shown in an applied psychology meta-analysis to positively impact intrateam trust and team performance [34] .
Group member stability and group size are also believed to contribute to a group's structure. In general, group Fig. 3 Proposed Group Trust Model. *In certain cases, trust outcomes become inputs into the ongoing system. **Components of a group's climate include a common group identity, group efficacy, psychological safety, psychological collectivism, and psychological ownership. ***Group leadership includes leadership style, characteristics, and behaviors New committee members may be more willing to cooperate with other members given the potential of building stronger future relationships.
Political Skill [44] A social effectiveness construct defined as the ability to effectively understand others at work and to use such knowledge to influence others to act in ways that enhance one's personal and/or organizational objectives A committee member who has particularly strong opinions about a trainee may be more persuasive (and potentially trusted as well) based upon his or her degree of political skill.
One's conception of his/her relatedness to other individuals
Committee members with a high relational identity orientation may take great steps to build relationships within the group and will likely be more trusted as well.
Need for Affiliation [33] An overlapping common factor among group members that motivates them to view each other as trustworthy Procedural Fairness [16, 42, 49, 50] For decision-making groups, this includes consideration of member input and influence over a decision. Fairness of procedures used by a group has been associated with increased levels of trust and commitment to group decisions.
Committee decisions are likely to be more trustworthy when the group follows procedures that are judged as fair by faculty members and trainees.
Swift Trust [33, 40] Occurs when individuals decide to trust others prior to developing longer term relationships. Swift trust develops as a function of members' own dispositional tendencies, quickly discernable surface-level cues of others, and imported trust-related information.
Initial/swift trust usually occurs in newly formed committees or with new members (especially if they don't work with more established members in other contexts). These individuals will have to decide if they are going to trust other members of the group and the committee itself before developing deeper relationships.
Task Interdependence [8, 34] The degree to which group members rely on one another and interact in order for the group to accomplish its goals, which may have an effect on group trust and trust between group members
Making collective decisions about trainee competence relies on the "wisdom of the group." Each faculty member only has a portion of the data based upon their own experiences. The group must compile performance data and members' experiences to build a collective picture of individual trainee competence.
Climate [36, 41-45, 51, 52] Components include a common group identity, group efficacy, psychological safety, psychological collectivism, and psychological ownership
The internal climate of a committee may be influenced by each of these factors. A common group identity, group efficacy, and psychological safety are probably most important for competency committees.
Leadership [23, 37, 38, 40, 42, 43, 45, 53, 54] Components include leadership style, characteristics, and behaviors
The committee chair is responsible for implementing the training program's policies and procedures related to this committee. Committee chairs may be more effective at building individual and collective trust if they are prototypical of the group, utilize an authentic or transformational leadership style, create a safe atmosphere, manage conflict/discussions, and demonstrate relational behaviors.
Reporting Relationships [54] In settings where groups report to diverse outside entities, these reporting relationships can be associated with role conflict, confusing expectations or role ambiguity, excessive demands, and competing priorities
The committee reports to their respective training program, which in turn reports information about resident performance to various accreditation agencies. If a committee is required to report to another entity outside of this chain, it may decrease trust amongst members of the group, especially member stability tends to positively impact communication patterns, the social interaction of teams, and interpersonal trust [42] . From an external perspective, smaller groups (i.e. less than 10 individuals) have generally been shown to be more trustworthy than larger groups (i.e. 10 or more individuals) in undergraduate psychology students [25] .
Work outside of medicine suggests that cooperation and monitoring behaviors are commonly impacted by the level of trust within a group. Group members who experience high trust tend to cooperate more, share information, accept influences from other members, and feel personally involved with the group. Monitoring behaviors usually occurs at the opposite end of the spectrum when trust between members is low and manifest when members feel a need to be vigilant about the actions and intentions of others. Groups in which members perceive colleagues as trustworthy are likely to demonstrate fewer monitoring behaviors and more cooperative behaviors based upon psychology research on undergraduate students, teams from European social care institutions, and hospital employees [17, 28, 46] .
Group conflict Conflict amongst group members appears to have complex associations. Task (cognitive) conflict tends to arise from individual differences in viewpoints, ideas, or opinions when group members participate in a shared undertaking. Conversely, relationship (affective) conflict tends to arise from interpersonal tensions. Scholars argue that these two types of conflict lead to different outcomes and contend that task conflict can be constructive whereas relationship conflict is usually dysfunctional based upon research from strategic decision-making teams, MBA graduate students, and higher education faculty [26, 31, 32] . Higher levels of conflict (especially relationship conflict) in teams are usually associated with lower trust. On the other hand, too much trust within a group may result in almost no conflict whatsoever regardless of type. Thus, the group may lose out on the positive effects of task conflict [47] .
In the management literature, even perceptions of conflict may lead to conflict within a group. How one perceives, defines, and interprets interpersonal discord may be more important than the nature of the conflict itself [33] . When one person distrusts another, that person may interpret ambiguous behaviors as threatening and convey distrust through his or her conduct. The person whose behavior is interpreted as threatening may reciprocate that distrust.
Group procedural fairness Two aspects of decision-making procedures have been shown to create perceptions of fairness: consideration of member input and influence over a decision. Consideration of input refers to the extent a group leader listens to and considers group member input during a decision-making Task Complexity and Uncertainty [40, 41] Associated with decreased levels of trust within a group, especially if the group is newly formed For a competency committee, it may be challenging to determine the attainment of various clinical competence domains for all trainees, especially with gaps in evaluation data or for large training programs. Increasing complexity and uncertainty may adversely affect trust by members in the committee's processes and decisions.
Outside Group Membership/ Social Ties [41] Group members may be worried that membership in other groups can lead new members to act in ways that harm their own group.
Committee members who serve on other hospital committees (e.g. credentials, risk management, etc.) may be perceived as more or less trustworthy from other members. However, this is probably a small contributor to trust within these committees.
Threats [41] External dangers or conflict with another group Time pressures and faculty availability (either for individual meetings or to serve longitudinally on the committee) are potential threats to group level trust within a competency committee. However, an understaffed committee may lead to higher trust between group members.
Staffing Levels [41] Understaffed groups may develop stronger trust amongst members than larger groups Trust Outcomes Attitudes [22-24, 27, 33, 36, 40 ] May include confidence, resiliency, creativity, group satisfaction and identity, cooperation, and commitment
Individual and group level trust within competency committees may lead to greater cooperation, commitment to the group, satisfaction, and confidence in group decisions.
Performance [22, 40, 42, 43, 55] May include group performance, group learning, information sharing, and decision quality
Individual and group level trust within competency committees may lead to better sharing of information, group learning, and quality of decisions.
process. Influence refers to the extent group member input affects or is reflected in the final decision. Fair procedures have been associated with positive attitudes toward the group and leader, resulting in group harmony and trust in the leader. Individual members who perceive fair procedures within the group are believed to be more likely to commit to group decisions based upon research from Fortune 500 management teams and Netherlands undergraduate students [16, 49] .
When task interdependence (the degree to which group members must interact and rely on one another to accomplish goals) is high, trust plays a more influential role because teamwork interactions become critical to achieving group goals [8, 34] .
Group climate A group's climate has multiple components and can be defined as shared perceptions of the kinds of behaviors, practices, and procedures that are supported within a group [56] . Climate may include a group's identity, defined as the degree to which members view the group as "we" versus "I." A common group identity may help develop trust, especially in diverse work groups, decrease negative attitudes and increase more positive affective responses toward other group members, and reduce mutual tensions and uncertainty [45] . Related to group identity is group efficacy. Efficacy has been defined in undergraduate Canadian business students at either the individual or group level and refers to an entity's belief in its ability to succeed in specific situations or accomplish a task [44] .
Psychological safety, collectivism, and ownership are all distinct and also contribute to a group's climate. In graduate-level business students, psychologically safe group environments encourage authenticity and risk-taking among group members because there is minimal fear of reprisal, punishment, harassment, or ridicule from others [36] . Groups with higher levels of psychological safety tend to have higher levels of trust [41] . Psychological collectivism refers to a person's propensity to favor group affiliation and the collective effort of the group over independent and autonomous effort. Compared with members who have low levels of psychological collectivism, a highly collectivistic individual will likely experience greater satisfaction working in a low-trust group environment, be more willing to work with other members, and more readily identify with that group [36] . Finally, psychological ownership refers to a feeling of possessiveness and attachment to a variety of objects within one's organization. These feelings of ownership lead one to value and take responsibility for those objects. In various industries, individuals who feel ownership may engage in territorial behaviors to communicate and defend their ownership claims, especially in lower trust environments [52] .
Leaders are believed to play a critical role in the development and maintenance of trust within a group. In healthcare and bank employees, authentic and transformational leadership styles have been shown to improve trust amongst members of a group [37, 53] . Legitimacy (e.g. honesty, fairness, respectfulness) of a group leader may also promote a climate of interpersonal trust in groups [42] . Additionally, prototypical leaders, which are leaders who share essential characteristics of their group, may foster employee trust in coworkers [38] .
Leader behaviors may also influence trust. Relational behaviors, those that encourage collaboration and open communication, have been shown to augment trust in top management teams [43] . Other leader behaviors that may foster trust include fairness, particularly for a prototypical group leader [38] , the ability to create a safe atmosphere [23] , establishing behavioral norms and climate of the group [40] , developing unique personal relationships with each group member [45] , managing conflict, and creating a superordinate mission for the group [54] .
Environmental factors also play an important role in situated cognition and may influence trust within a group. External reporting relationships can add complexity to shared tasks. Groups that experience large amounts of pressure and conflict caused by reporting relationships to outside entities may report role conflict, confusing expectations or role ambiguity, and excessive demands resulting in overload and competing priorities [54] . Task complexity and uncertainty can also influence trust amongst a group. The link between task uncertainty and trust has been studied in swift action starting teams, which are highly interdependent teams of skilled individuals in organizations that complete demanding, complex, time-pressured projects and are often formed quickly. High levels of task uncertainty may deplete cognitive resources, so members in these teams may become overly dependent on heuristic-based decisionmaking and rely more heavily on predispositions than would groups in less uncertain situations [40] . Additionally, group members may value predictability within the group, especially with increasingly unpredictable events outside of the group. As a result, established members of a group might be reluctant to trust new members given the uncertainty that they bring to the group [41] . Additional external factors that may impact a group include individuals' memberships in other groups and social ties, threats (e.g. external dangers or conflict with another group), and staffing levels (e.g. if a group is understaffed, trust may develop more strongly than if the group were larger because members are forced to work more closely together) [41] .
Although multiple definitions of general trust exist in the literature and scholars have explored trust within work teams, we were unable to find a clear definition of "group trust." Further, trust in group decisions has not been well studied within or outside of health professions education. We define group trust as a group-directed willingness to accept vulnerability to actions of the members based on the expectation that members will perform a particular action important to the group, encompassing social exchange, collective perceptions, and interpersonal trust (Fig. 2) .
In a group, we agree with the literature outside of health professions education that trust occurs at multiple levels encompassing both individual level and group level processes simultaneously. For example, in a competency committee, members must be able to reconcile differences of opinion and work with colleagues on the committee to make decisions that are in the best interests of not only their trainees, but ultimately the patients for whom their trainees provide care. Committee members must also be able to trust one another to pull their own weight on the committee, respect other individuals' opinions, provide constructive input, and make fair judgments.
Higher levels of interpersonal trust will likely lead to a higher degree of trust at the group level. Higher degrees of trust at both levels have been associated with attitudinal outcomes, such as increased cooperation and satisfaction [22, 33, 40] , and performance outcomes, such as information sharing and quality of group decisions [22, 42, 43, 55] . Additionally, developing a more thorough understanding of trust in the context of competency committees may help these committees implement more meaningful and effective processes to make collective decisions regarding trainee competence.
Based upon a synthesis of the information uncovered in this scoping review, we propose a model (Fig. 3) to better understand trust at the group level and the various factors that may influence the trust of group decisions. Our model uses situated cognition to incorporate trust at both levels along with other group level factors, environmental factors, and most importantly, the interactions between all of these elements. We also include practical implications for group decision-making, such as competency committees, in Table 3 .
While this model has been empirically tested in limited settings [57] , future research should further explore our model in group settings to determine the applicability of our proposed definition and factors that we contend influence group trust. We also suggest additional research looking at trust in group decisions from an external stakeholder perspective (e.g. a person who is not a competency committee member) and what, if any differences may exist between this and group trust. For competency committee decisions, this might involve examining how program directors and individual faculty members who are not on a competency committee define trust in this context. Observing additional competency committee meetings with our proposed group trust framework may provide additional insight about how group trust operates in health professions education settings.
Our research is limited by the fact that all of our data came from fields outside of health professions education, and trust in other occupational settings may not be the same as trust in health professions education settings. Similarly, some of the reviewed papers focused on undergraduate and graduate students, and characteristics of these learners may not be the same as trainees in health professions education. However, we attempted to tie together universal characteristics of trust across industries and populations studied to develop a model that may be applicable to health professions education groups and warrants further investigation. Indeed, we also provide specific examples of how the model applies directly to competency committees and the collective decisions they make (Table 3) .
This scoping review should allow educators and leaders to better appreciate what factors may contribute to trust in group settings (e.g. competency committees). As programs establish and refine policies, procedures, and membership of these committees, our proposed definition and model may help to improve the translation of evaluation data and individual opinions into competency decisions. Educators who understand these factors may also help create a collective environment of trust not only on a competency committee, but potentially within their organization as well. Trainees, patients, and other stakeholders trust competency committees to make carefully weighted decisions, and it is important to determine how these committees can demonstrate that this trust is not misplaced.
With a series of articles published over the last two years 1-3 E Tahir and colleagues participate in the debate on potential detrimental consequences for cardiac structure and function related to extensive, strenuous exercis. 4, 5 In order to further study the well-described biological significance of elevated cardiac biomarkers seen after extreme endurance competitions they have investigated triathletes by blood sampling and cardiac magnetic imaging before and after competition (mean race time: 3.3 AE 2.7 h). In the current study published in the European Journal of Preventive Cardiology 1 the authors aimed to assess the predictive value of clinical baseline characteristics of their athletes, for example, training history, maximal exercise capacity and exercise blood pressure during ergometry as well as myocardial dimensions and fibrosis assed by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) and correlated these to increases of cardiac biomarkers and impairment of myocardial function or structure during the race.
The data imply good and bad news for endurance (elite) athletes. First, it was found that despite the fact that serum cardiac biomarkers such as troponin T and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) significantly increased immediately after the race, maximal exercise strain during a triathlon race does not induce acute overt myocardial inflammation or oedema as assessed by CMR. 1 In a way, these data exonerate such extreme exercise since others had generally observed discrete morphological alterations of the myocardium after endurance competitions, 6, 7 including an increase of physiological strain of the myocardium during volume overload, particularly of the right ventricle. 8, 9 The bad news is that Tahir and colleagues revealed a positive late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in CMR as a correlate for myocardial fibrosis in a large portion of their athlete male population (33%), a finding more pronounced than in previous investigations. [10] [11] [12] Explanations for the prevalence of myocardial lesions particularly in male athletes are diverse and include genetic predisposition, gender (females are less affected), risk factors for coronary artery disease and coronary ischaemia itself, acute or reactivated myocarditis, pulmonary artery pressure overload and exercise-induced repetitive micro-injury during prolonged exercise stress. 13, 14 However, most importantly the series of data 1,3 adds another potential risk factor to the currently discussed ones, the role of exercise blood pressure on myocardial remodelling and determinant for myocardial injury. The current study has revealed that those athletes with positive LGE had a significantly higher maximal exercise blood pressure (30 mmHg higher compared with LGE negative athletes) at similar maximal exercise capacities between groups. Also, early adaptation typical for arterial hypertension such as left ventricular hypertrophy and left atrial enlargement was observed in the LGE positive group. 1 Furthermore, in LGE positive athletes post-race values demonstrated increased left atrial strain as indicated by a trend towards higher NT-proBNP values. 1 These findings are supported by the research group's previous analysis also investigating triathletes, in which peak exercise systolic blood pressure assessed during ergometry before the race and exercise volume during the race were identified as independent predictors of the presence of LGE. 3 Summing up these data may lead to the hypothesis that a repetitive volume overload of the myocardium induced by repetitive endurance training sessions of several hours per day over many years will have an impact on vascular and myocardial physiological adaptation as well as pathological remodelling, resulting in a consecutive pressure overload with increased blood pressures during exercise ( Figure 1 ). Whether this will eventually lead to increased incidence of atrial fibrillation in athletes exposed to long-term exercise remains to be determined. [15] [16] [17] [18] Among cardiovascular risk factors, arterial hypertension is a key risk factor for coronary artery disease, myocardial dysfunction, left ventricular hypertrophy and remodelling also increasing the risk for clinical events. 19, 20 Even in athletes, hypertension is one of the most common pathologies detected during screening. 21 The role of hypertensive blood pressure values during exercise, however, is uncertain. Epidemiological data assessing exercise blood pressure have demonstrated an increased risk of subsequent development of arterial hypertension as well as cardiovascular events in those with excessive blood pressure values during exercise. [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] Despite this evidence, it has not been included for risk factor assessment in recent European Society of Cardiology (ESC)/European Society of Hypertension arterial hypertension guidelines. 28 Interestingly, elevated blood pressure values during exercise are not uncommon in middle-aged marathon runners 29 and especially high exercise values exceeding the recommended maximal exercise values are seen in 43% of males (>210 mmHg) and 28% in females (>190 mmHg). 30 Moreover, in middleaged competitive athletes of different disciplines a higher prevalence of masked hypertension has been observed. [31] [32] [33] [34] Importantly, very recent data have revealed that higher blood pressure response during exercise was associated with a 3.6-fold increased risk of developing hypertension after 6.5 years of follow-up (26 to 32 years). 35 Therefore, current ESC/European Association of Preventive Cardiology hypertension guidelines of the section of sports cardiology have included the entity in their recommendation. 36, 37 Physiological myocardial adaptation induced by exercise training in athletes is dependent on genetics, family history of hypertension, gender, body composition and exercise volume as well as exercise blood pressure. 30, [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] However, the role of exercise blood pressure on myocardial adaptations has been less appreciated in athletes. 39, 40 According to the currently presented and previously published data 1,3 this will have to be followed more closely and investigated in detail. Even with the current data, though, it is far too early to draw clinical conclusions on treatment of exercise hypertension in athletes. An interesting field of research will have to focus on gender differences between male and female athletes, who have revealed no LGE. 3 Whether this finding will be the key explanation for a lower incidence of sudden cardiac death in female athletes will have to be elucidated. 43 Moreover, the causality of structural adaptations found in athletes and elevated blood pressure during exercise (chicken and egg) as well as the mechanistic underpinnings need to be determined.
Nonetheless, timely identification of hypertensive athletes is important in the setting of pre-participation cardiovascular screening in order to implement appropriate non-pharmacological as well as pharmacological management and follow-up. 36, 37 Already today, arterial hypertension is the most common cause for exclusion, at least temporarily, from competitive sport participation. 44 Therefore, assessment of blood pressure regulation at rest and during exercise is particularly important across the whole age spectrum, particularly the young and the elderly. Important to note is that children and adolescents have lower blood pressure levels with normal values < 120/80 mmHg in those aged 18 and 19 years and even lower values in adolescents. 45 In elderly master athletes blood pressure regulation independent of pharmacological intervention or after treatment is, however, less clear and should definitely be investigated in upcoming studies. Moreover, the role of supplements, energy drinks, medications (including anti-inflammatory drugs or thyroid hormones for weight reduction), or performance enhancing substances such as erythropoetin and anabolic steroids may be an underestimated cause of secondary hypertension in athletes 46 and should be explored during the evaluation in athletes with recent and unexplained onset of systemic hypertension. 37 If identified, athletes with arterial hypertension should be treated according to the general guidelines for the management of hypertension. 47 Taken together, E Tahir and colleagues have to be congratulated for addressing an underestimated entity for the physiological as well as pathological adaptation of the myocardium during exercise, the role of arterial exercise hypertension, although it remains unclear whether the data of three publications are partly overlapping. [1] [2] [3] Moreover, from a methodological point of view an observational study such as the present one could go further by adding multivariate analyses or, in the case of quantitative data, respectively adjusted regression analyses. Thus, it remains unclear to what extent the conclusions of Tahir et al. are limited by obvious differences in baseline parameters (seven years of age and a body mass index of 1.7 kg/m 2 ) between the subjects with and without CMR evidence of cardiac fibrosis as well as hidden differences, for example, the years in competitive endurance performance, which have not been reported. Thus, it will remain essential to study exercise blood pressure during training and competition as a so far underacknowledged matter in endurance athletes.
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Hypercholesterolemia is a well-documented risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality [1] [2] [3] [4] . However, the relationship between ischemic stroke and cholesterol is complex and appears to contain several paradoxes [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] . Many large-scale studies on stroke and cholesterol have not differentiated between ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke, nor among various subtypes of ischemic stroke [6, [8] [9] [10] . It has been demonstrated that cholesterol may increase the risk of only certain types of stroke [13] [14] [15] , and low cholesterol levels predispose to hemorrhagic stroke [10, 16] , thus weakening an association between cholesterol and all stroke. Regardless of increased cardiovascular disease risk with high cholesterol levels and decreased stroke risk with statin use, a higher cholesterol value has been associated with a better stroke outcome in several studies [17] [18] [19] [20] . Further research has shown "reverse epidemiology" between cholesterol levels at admission, statin treatment and stroke morbidity. Earlier studies have shown a positive association between elevated admission cholesterol at ischemic stroke onset and improved short-term functional outcome [21] and 10-year survival [22] .
These paradoxical observations may be related to differential associations with different stroke subtypes. Several recent studies reported that cholesterol was lowest in cardioembolic strokes [15, 23, 24] . The largest prospective cohort of 4128 adults aged >70 years reported that high or normal/borderline total cholesterol values were associated with good survival compared to low values [25] .
We aimed to estimate odds of having AIS with LDs, and whether or not LDs in AIS patients were associated with better outcomes.
Data was obtained from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS) between January 2003 and December 2014. The NIS is the largest publicly available all-payer inpatient care database in the United States and contains discharge-level data provided by states that participate in the HCUP (including a total of 46 in 2011). This administrative dataset contains data on approximately 8 million hospitalizations in 1000 hospitals that were chosen to approximate a 20% stratified sample of all US community hospitals, representing more than 95% of the national population. Criteria used for stratified sampling of hospitals into the NIS include hospital ownership, patient volume, teaching status, urban or rural location, and geographic region. Discharge weights are provided for each patient discharge record, which allow extrapolation to obtain national estimates. Each hospitalization is treated as an individual entry in the database and is coded with one principal diagnosis, up to 24 secondary diagnoses, and 15 procedural diagnoses associated with that stay. Detailed information on NIS is available at http://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/db/nation/nis/nisdde.jsp.
The data were taken from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, which is a deidentified database from "Health Care Utilization Project (HCUP)" sponsored by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, USA, thus informed consent or IRB approval was not needed for the study. The relevant ethical oversight and HCUP Data Use Agreement (HCUP-4Q28K90CU) were obtained for the study.
We used the ninth revision of the International Classification of Diseases, clinical modification codes (ICD-9-CM) to identify adult patients admitted with a primary diagnosis of AIS (ICD-9-CM codes 433.01, 433.11, 433.21, 433.31, 433.81, 433.91, 434.01, 434.11, 434.91). These codes have been previously validated and are 35% sensitive, 99% specific, 96% positive predictive value (PPVs), and 79% negative predictive value for the diagnosis of ischemic stroke [26] . Similarly, patients with secondary diagnosis of LDs were identified using ICD-9-CM codes 272.0, 272.1, and 272.2 (sensitivity of 27.0%, specificity of 76.7%, PPV of 71.1%, and NPV of 33.1%) [27] . We used ICD-9-CM codes to identify independent predictors (covariates), including the comorbidities of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, atrial fibrillation, use of anticoagulant and antiplatelet medications, chronic use of NSAIDs and aspirin, smoking (current/past), use of IV tPA, drug abuse, alcohol dependence, smoking status, mechanical thrombectomy, AV malformation, amyloidosis, atrial fibrillation, nasogastric tube, gastrostomy, endotracheal intubation, non-invasive mechanical ventilation, invasive mechanical ventilation and H. pylori infection. Supplementary Table S1 lists all ICD-9-CM codes that were used for this study.
AIS patients were stratified by LDs status. Age < 18 years and admissions with missing data for age, sex, and race were excluded.
Patient characteristics of interest were sex, age, race, insurance status and concomitant diagnoses as defined above. Race was defined by White (referent), African American, Hispanic, Asian or Pacific Islander, and Native American. Insurance status was defined by Medicare (referent), Medicaid, private insurance, and other/self-pay/no charge. We defined the severity of co-morbid conditions using Deyo's modification of the Charlson co-morbidity index (CCI) (Supplementary Table S2 ). Thirty-one facilities were considered to be teaching hospitals if they have an American Medical Association-approved residency program, are a member of the Council of Teaching Hospitals, or have a full-time equivalent interns and residents to patient's ratio of ≥0. 25 . HCUP NIS contains data on total charges for each hospital in the databases, which represents the amount that hospitals billed for services.
We tested for associations between LDs and AIS amongst the January 2014-December 2014 dataset. We also examined outcomes such as all-cause in hospital mortality, All Patient Refined Diagnosis Related Groups (APR-DRG) risk of death (RoD), APR-DRG loss of function (LoF), discharge disposition (DD) [home vs. transfer to short-term hospital (STH), skilled nursing facility (SNF), intermediate care facility (ICF)], post-stroke complications like epilepsy, stroke-associated pneumonia (SAP), hemorrhagic transformation (HT), upper gastro-intestinal bleeding (UGIB), length of stay (LoS), and cost of hospitalization with LDs amongst AIS hospitalizations (years [2003] [2004] [2005] [2006] [2007] [2008] [2009] [2010] [2011] [2012] [2013] [2014] . The comparison of disability/loss of function was investigated by APR-DRGs severity between patients with LDs and patients without LDs on discharge. Similarly, risk of death was assigned using APR-DRG likelihood of death (risk of death) on discharge. APR-DRGs were assigned using software developed by 3M Health Information Systems, where score 1 indicates minor, 2-moderate, 3-major, 4-extreme loss of function or likelihood of death on discharge.
All statistical analyses were performed using the weighted survey methods in SAS (version 9.4). Weighted values of patient-level observations were generated to produce a nationally representative estimate of the entire US population of hospitalized patients. Univariate analysis of differences between categorical variables was tested using the chi-square test and analysis of differences between continuous variables (LoS and cost of hospitalization) was tested using Student's t-test. Mixed-effects survey logistic regression models with weighted analysis were used for the categorical dependent variables, including LDs and outcomes of interest, in order to estimate odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals for the association between AIS and LDs in the 2014 cohort as well as LDs and outcomes amongst AIS hospitalizations during years [2003] [2004] [2005] [2006] [2007] [2008] [2009] [2010] [2011] [2012] [2013] [2014] .
The hierarchical models (demographics and patient-level factors nested within hospital-level factors) were created as random effects within the model for the outcomes. In the multivariate models, we had included demographics (age, gender, race), patient-level hospitalization variables (admission day, primary payer, admission type, median household income category), hospital-level variables (hospital region, teaching versus nonteaching hospital, hospital bed size), comorbidities/concurrent conditions like hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, atrial fibrillation, obesity, hemorrhagic transformation, smoking status, drug abuse, alcohol abuse, medication use (anticoagulant and antiplatelet medication, chronic use of aspirin), and use of IV tPA during the same hospitalization or in a different institution within the 24 h prior to admission to the facility, mechanical thrombectomy, gastrostomy, nasogastric tube insertion, invasive-noninvasive mechanical ventilation, and CCI. The confounders of the models were tailored according to the need of the individual model.
We investigated the link between LDs and AIS, LDs and post-AIS outcomes, and LDs and post-AIS complications by creating separate mix effect survey logistic regression models with weights to account for sampling strategy to find out:
( For each model, C-index was calculated. All statistical tests used were 2-sided, and p < 0.05 was deemed statistically significant.

We identified 28,212,820 total hospitalizations in 2014, ( Figure 1A ) out of which (569,215) 2.02% and (1,550,956) 5.50% patients were hospitalized with primary or secondary diagnosis of AIS and LDs respectively. Out of 569,215 patients with AIS, 50,005 (8.78%) had LDs. Patients with LDs had higher prevalence of having AIS (3.22% vs. 1.95%; p < 0.0001) compared with non-LDs (Table 1) . For each model, C-index was calculated. All statistical tests used were 2-sided, and p < 0.05 was deemed statistically significant.

We identified 28,212,820 total hospitalizations in 2014, ( Figure 1A ) out of which (569,215) 2.02% and (1,550,956) 5.50% patients were hospitalized with primary or secondary diagnosis of AIS and LDs respectively. Out of 569,215 patients with AIS, 50,005 (8.78%) had LDs. Patients with LDs had higher prevalence of having AIS (3.22% vs. 1.95%; p < 0.0001) compared with non-LDs ( Table 1 ). Table 2 includes regression models among 2014 hospitalizations with odds of having AIS amongst LDs vs. non-LDs after adjusting for patients' demographics, patients and hospital level characteristics, co-morbidities, and CCI. In multivariate survey logistic regression analysis, LD was associated with higher adjusted odds of having AIS (aOR: 1.18; 95% CI:1.15-1.20; p < 0.0001) compared to non-LDs. The AUC or C statistic of the ROC was used to validate the accuracy of the regressions. The AUC was 0.88, which indicates a precise/good model. 
We found a total of 4,224,924 hospitalizations due to AIS from year 2003 to 2014 after excluding patients with age < 18 years and admissions with missing data for age, gender, and race ( Figure 1B) . Out of 4,224,924 AIS hospitalizations, 451,645 (10.69%) had LDs.
We analyzed prevalence trends of LDs in AIS hospitalizations. As shown in Figure 2 AIS hospitalizations with LDs were more likely to be female (49.35% vs. 46.85%, p < 0.0001). There was no difference in other demographic characteristics like age and race among AIS hospitalizations with and without hyperlipidemia. Co-morbidities such as diabetes (40.02% vs. 33.50%, p < 0.0001), hypertension (86.44% vs. 78.66%, p < 0.0001), and obesity (9.85% vs. 7.63%, p < 0.0001) were higher in patients with LDs than those without LDs. AIS hospitalizations in large, urban (teaching and non-teaching) hospitals and in the Northeast region were more likely to have patients with LDs (Table 3) . AIS hospitalizations with LDs were more likely to be female (49.35% vs. 46.85%, p < 0.0001). There was no difference in other demographic characteristics like age and race among AIS hospitalizations with and without hyperlipidemia. Co-morbidities such as diabetes (40.02% vs. 33.50%, p < 0.0001), hypertension (86.44% vs. 78.66%, p < 0.0001), and obesity (9.85% vs. 7.63%, p < 0.0001) were higher in patients with LDs than those without LDs. AIS hospitalizations in large, urban (teaching and non-teaching) hospitals and in the Northeast region were more likely to have patients with LDs (Table 3) . Table 4 includes outcomes of LDs among AIS hospitalizations. Our outcomes of interest were to identify post-AIS outcomes (in-hospital mortality, discharge, disability, risk of death) and complications (post stroke early epilepsy, stroke associated pneumonia, hemorrhagic transformation and upper gastro-intestinal bleeding) amongst AIS hospitalizations. All cause in-hospital mortality was lower in AIS with LDs (2.93% vs. 5.48%, p < 0.0001) than without LDs. Some 43.14% of patients with LDs had discharged to home compared to 36.81% without LDs (p < 0.0001). Overall, AIS hospitalizations with LDs had a higher prevalence of discharge to home or routine (43.14% vs. 36.81%, p < 0.0001) and a lower prevalence of discharge other than home (56.86% vs. 63.19%, p < 0.0001) compared to patients without LDs. The prevalence of major/severe loss of function was lower (29.92% vs. 37.75%, p < 0.0001) among AIS hospitalizations with LDs than without LDs. The patients with LDs was also associated with lower prevalence major/extreme likelihood of death (15.8% vs. 21.89%, p < 0.0001) in AIS hospitalizations. Prevalence of post stroke early epilepsy (4.68% vs. 6.13%, p < 0.0001), SAP (2.14% vs. 3.70%, p < 0.0001), HT (1.25% vs. 1.71%, p < 0.0001) and UGIB (0.33% vs. 0.45%, p < 0.0001) were lower among AIS hospitalizations with LDs than without LDs. Mean length of stay (4.83 days vs. 5.83 days, p < 0.0001) and total cost of hospitalization were lower amongst patients with LDs ($34,604 vs. 38,547, p < 0.0001) ( Table 4) . Table 5 lists multivariate analysis of outcomes and complications in AIS hospitalizations. LDs were associated with lower adjusted odds of all cause in-hospital mortality (aOR: 0.66, 95% CI: 0.62-0.69, p < 0.0001), discharge disposition (home vs. no-home) (aOR: 0.83, 95% CI: 0.82-0.85, p < 0.0001), APR-DRG loss of function (major/severe vs. minor/moderate) (aOR: 0.80, 95% CI: 0.79-0.82, p < 0.0001), and APR-DRG risk of death (major/severe likelihood vs. minor/moderate likelihood) (aOR: 0.77, 95% CI: 0.75-0.79, p < 0.0001) in comparison to patients without LDs amongst AIS hospitalizations of year 2003-2014 (Models 1-4) . Table 5 . Multivariate logistic regression analysis of outcomes and complications in patients with LDs compared to non-LDs (reference) amongst AIS hospitalizations. All models are adjusted for demographics (age, gender, race), patient-level hospitalization variables (admission day, primary payer, admission type, median household income category), hospital-level variables (hospital region, teaching versus non-teaching hospital, hospital bed-size), comorbidities, concurrent conditions like hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, atrial fibrillation, obesity, amyloidosis, hemorrhagic transformation, smoking status, drug abuse, alcohol abuse, medication use (anticoagulant and antiplatelet medication, platelets inhibitor infusion, chronic use of aspirin), and use of IV tPA during the same hospitalization or in a different institution within the 24 h prior to admission to the facility, mechanical thrombectomy, gastrostomy, nasogastric tube insertion, invasive-noninvasive mechanical ventilation, and Charlson's co-morbidity index (CCI). C statistic was used to validate the accuracy of the regressions. All models have c-index >0.6, which indicates a good model fit (Table 5 ).

In this study, we aimed to investigate the link between acute ischemic stroke (AIS) and lipid disorders (LDs), specifically the odds of having AIS with LDs, and whether LDs were associated with better outcomes or less complications in AIS patients as compared to those without LDs. We did this by performing a population-based retrospective cross-sectional analysis of the NIS in adult hospitalizations for AIS.
Our study found that those with LDs had a higher prevalence of being hospitalized with AIS as compared to those without LDs. Co-morbidities, such as diabetes, hypertension, obesity, and depression were also higher in those with LDs than in those without them. Our findings are similar to a study by Olsen et al. who have reported that patients with hypercholesterolemia are at increased risk of stroke [22] . However, the paradoxical relationship is evident when analyzing for post-AIS outcomes such as in-hospital mortality, discharge status, disability, and risk of death, as well as post-AIS complications such as post-stroke early epilepsy, stroke associated pneumonia, hemorrhagic transformation, and upper GI bleeding.
For AIS patients with lipid disorders, there was reduced in-hospital mortality (aOR: 0.66, p < 0.0001), increased discharge to home (aOR: 0.83, p < 0.0001), decreased major/severe loss of function (aOR: 0.80, p < 0.0001), and decreased major/extreme likelihood of death (aOR: 0.77, p < 0.0001); additionally, there was reduced risk of post stroke epilepsy (aOR:0.89, p < 0.0001), SAP (aOR: 0.75, p < 0.0001), upper GI bleeding (aOR:0.85, p < 0.0001) and hemorrhagic transformation (aOR: 0.82, p < 0.0001) as compared to AIS patients without LDs. There are supporting studies to our paradoxical findings that have reported higher cholesterol levels on admission are associated with better long-term survival or outcomes amongst AIS survivors [22, 28, 29] .
There is thus an incongruity that is seen in AIS patients; on one hand, there is a benefit to reducing cholesterol and LDs in that there is a reduced prevalence of AIS and co-morbidities as compared to those without LDs, as well as for being beneficial for cerebrovascular mortality and morbidity [3, 4] . However, patients with LDs have better post-AIS outcomes and less post-AIS complications.
This paradox may be explained by the type of stroke that is often seen with those with LDs. Those with LDs may be more predisposed toward small-vessel strokes, and thus will have less severe strokes with better prognoses; as a result, they would have improved post-AIS outcomes and reduced post-AIS complications as compared to those without LDs who may be more prone to the often more severe large brain vessel occlusion. This theory can be supported by our data, as well as that large occlusion of brain vessels as seen in cardio embolic strokes have the lowest total serum cholesterol levels [23, 24] .
Interestingly, the trends of LDs in AIS hospitalizations have decreased from 2003-2014. This may be due to reduced hospitalizations for minor strokes and may support theory that those with LDs are more prone to small-vessel strokes which have better prognoses. Thus, those patients with LDs and minor strokes are often not being hospitalized as much, and if they are, they will show improved post-AIS outcomes and reduced complications as shown in our study. However, in our study AIS was analyzed as a whole, and was not classified into subtypes using TOAST classification. This was one limitation of our study to support the decreasing trends and theory of LDs association with small vessel stroke which have better prognoses.
This analysis and confirmation of the paradoxical relationship seen between LDs and AIS may have implications for treatment strategies in the future. Statins are certainly beneficial to cardiovascular health, have been proven to have neuroprotective and microvascular benefits in animal stroke models, and may be important in augmenting cerebral repair after ischemic injury [20] . They also have been proven to improve survival for up to a year after stroke.
Further work must be done in order to fully determine why LDs seem to have a beneficial effect on AIS outcomes and complications, and to determine potential treatment strategies. Clinical trials should be run to determine the effects of LDs and statins on AIS, AIS subtypes such as small-vessel disease, and AIS outcomes and complications.
A major strength of the study was that findings were nationally representative for the USA. NIS data is a large deidentified inpatient database, and our study has good statistical power. The APR-DRG coding systems used in this study to assess the severity of illness and risk of mortality are externally validated. They are very reliable and consistent, and widely used by hospitals, consumers, payers and regulators [30, 31] .
One main limitation to this study mentioned above, AIS was not classified into subtypes using TOAST classification (such as cardio-embolic, small-vessel, or large artery atherothrombotic strokes). Further investigations should classify AIS into these subtypes and determine if there is an association between LDs and these subtypes. This would be able to determine if theory that LDs cause the less severe small-vessel strokes is correct, and thus is the reason why we see better AIS-outcomes and reduced complications with LDs. Another limitation of the study was LDs were identified as a secondary diagnosis (history of LDs or first-time diagnosis) responsible for AIS and we did not have data on statin use prior or during the hospitalization. So neuroprotective role of statin [20] was difficult to differentiate. Other limitations to this study include the fact that we only considered patients who were hospitalized with strokes; between 10%-40% of stroke patients are not admitted to the in-patient hospital [13] . Thus, patients with less severe strokes may not be included in this study. The outcomes evaluated while patients were in hospital and status of patients on discharge, we had not evaluated the long-term outcomes. Additionally, although co-morbidities were accounted for and adjusted for in analysis, other subtler differences between patients such as prior strokes or other unaccounted medications may flaw our design outcomes. Though we had adjusted outcomes model with antiplatelets or anticoagulant use before and during hospitalization, but we had no record on statin use to adjust the models.
LDs have been shown to have an increased prevalence in patients with AIS hospitalizations as compared to those without LDs. However, we have also confirmed that LDs have paradoxically been shown to improve post-AIS outcomes and reduce post-AIS complications. This complicated relationship between stroke and LDs requires further work and research to determine the reasoning as to the associated benefit between higher lipids and better outcomes, and whether the theory in that LDs have a stronger association in causing small vessel and thus less severe strokes with better prognoses can be confirmed. Clinical trials should be undertaken to further determine the relationship of statin uses and outcomes to refine treatment strategies before and after stroke onset, and further work should be initiated to determine the association between LDs and AIS subtypes such as small-vessel strokes, AIS-subtype outcomes, and AIS-subtype complications.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/1010-660X/55/8/475/s1. Table S1 : ICD-9-CM codes used in this analysis, Table S2 
The development of paediatric critical care registries, a term we take to include national audits and research databases, has been instrumental in helping us understand the state of children's critical care and thereby provide a platform for future improvement. Comprehensive datasets enable monitoring of activity and outcomes for audit, safety and service planning. Registry databases play a crucial role in paediatric critical care research by providing information for observational studies and data to plan multicentre interventional clinical trials. There are a number of examples: the Paediatric Intensive Care Audit Network (PICANet) collects data for every admission to paediatric intensive care units (PICU) in the UK and Ireland, and the Australian and New Zealand Paediatric Intensive Care Registry (ANZPICR) collects data for children admitted to PICUs and adult intensive care units. Virtual Pediatric Systems (VPS) is a large database covering over 135 units and over 1 million cases in the USA, but does not collect data from all national PICUs.
Paediatric intensive care medicine has a number of features, which expose the methodological problems of studies involving either one or few centres. Admission numbers and mortality rates are low (see Table 1 ). Infants and children in PICU present with a heterogeneous range of primary illness and co-morbidities, and the age range is broad-over 40% of admissions are under 1 year of age and a small number (2.4%) over 15 [1] -meaning that the pathophysiology of paediatric critical illness is hugely varied. Aggregation of data in registries helps us to overcome the problem of small numbers and describe patient characteristics, treatments and outcomes.
Use of registry databases to monitor safety and drive quality improvement is well described [2] : this includes transparent reporting of outcomes based on nationally or internationally agreed benchmarks in order to ensure safety and quality. Additionally, registries offer a wellestablished platform for observational studies, leading to a large body of research describing ICU processes, disease states and therapeutic interventions. Linking datasets-for example linking PICU databases to national hospital episodes datasets to provide detailed diagnostic information on children with life-limiting conditions [3] -enhances their explanatory power. Paediatric intensive care databases use mortality prediction models to enable participating units to benchmark their outcomes, and in turn, the data contributed by the participating units are used to construct and update these models in a symbiotic relationship [4] . Although registry studies are observational and hence cannot demonstrate causality, they are integral to the design and conduct of paediatric clinical trials. Databases can be interrogated in the planning stage, to provide epidemiological and outcome data for the diseases or treatments of interest. The data collection infrastructure can then be harnessed to provide high-quality data to the trial. The ChiP trial of tight glycaemic control in critically ill children [5] , the CATCH trial of antibiotic impregnated central venous catheters [6] and the ongoing I-KID trial of infant kidney dialysis and filtration are good examples of this [7] . Recent interest has focussed on registry-based randomised trials [8] which, despite the potential challenges of consent, standardisation and quality of data, may represent a future avenue for high-quality, low-cost clinical trials in PICUs.
Moynihan and colleagues [9] have produced an excellent example of the powerful insights offered by a wellestablished and comprehensive paediatric intensive care registry. In this binational 11-year retrospective study of child death in Australia and New Zealand, children admitted to intensive care were identified via ANZPICR. In addition, data from the national census of both countries were used to provide population-based mortality data over the study period. The authors report a decline in both crude and risk-adjusted ICU mortality (0.1% per year) over the 11-year period. 12% of all child deaths in Australia and New Zealand occurred in ICU. Data on mode of death of children in ICU are presented, indicating that half the deaths occurred following withdrawal of life-sustaining therapy, the rate of death despite maximal support was 21% and fell by 0.9% per year, and the rate of diagnosis of brain death rose.
Moynihan and colleagues report longitudinal trends on mode of death from this binational dataset, which is unique in paediatric critical care medicine and comparable in scope to large adult data sets (see Table 1 ). Some encouragement can be found in the decrease in the proportions of deaths taking place despite maximal support; however, questions remain about the role intensive care should play at the end of life for many of these children and their families. Such debates are informed by registrybased research: three decades of data from a single centre in Australia demonstrated that children who would not have been offered intensive care at the beginning of the period are now surviving with moderate or severe disability [10] . A large longitudinal database study from all the PICUs in England showed that 58% of PICU admissions and 73% of PICU deaths were for children with lifelimiting conditions [11] . In addition, children are taking longer to die on the PICU with a pattern of early death due to treatment failure being replaced by death following a prolonged PICU admission [12] . Moynihan and colleagues use their findings to call for an increase in the use of advance planning and palliative care involvement for critically ill children. They are right to do so, and this should form part of a wider discussion [13] about the role that intensive therapies should play in the lives of critically ill children, many of whom are likely to die in childhood.
To fully understand the impact of critical illness on children and families, there is a need to collect highquality longitudinal data from multiple data sources in a standardised format that will measure the range of outcomes and complexity of processes involved. Understanding the whole patient journey from illness onset to discharge is vital to allow informed, evidence-based planning of paediatric health services. Collecting these additional data will involve the need for funding, technical expertise and governance approvals at a national level. At an international level, harmonising definitions and then using these complex longitudinal data will provide insight into the effects of different organisational social and health structures on the delivery of paediatric critical care. Armed with this information, society can make an informed choice about how, where and what care for critically ill children is delivered in the future. 
Ultrasonic temperature measurement, as a non-intrusive technique, plays a crucial role in plenty of industrial processes due to its strong environmental adaptability [1, 2] , high reliability [3] , low cost [4] and wide measuring range [5] . The basic principle is that the ultrasound velocity in any medium is generally a function of temperature. In most liquids, the function is linear; in a gaseous environment, the velocity is directly proportional to the square root of the temperature; and in solid mediums, the velocity generally decreases with the increasing of the temperature [6] . Thus, if the ultrasound velocity is measured, the temperature can be determined. In our previous study [7] , we proposed a promising method for highly accurate ultrasonic temperature measurement. Two transducers, mounted face to face, act as the transmitter and the receiver of the ultrasound signals, respectively, and the distance between them is fixed. By estimating the time delay (TD) between the transmitted signal and the received signal, the ultrasound velocity is given, and the temperature can be determined.
However, the estimated TD contains not only the desired time of flight of sound, but also a system latency which includes the time taken by the transmitter to produce the sound, the time taken by the receiver to produce the electrical signal and the time taken by the conditioning circuit [8] . The system latency is an intrinsic hardware constant that need to be estimated in advance. Moreover, the path length of sound is generally not the transducers' geometrical distance, but the travelling sound path length which serves as the acoustic center-to-center distance [5] . The exact path length is not available from direct distance measurement. Therefore, to accurately estimate the path length and the system latency, calibration work of the ultrasonic system should be performed, which is the basis of high accuracy ultrasonic temperature measurement.
The calibration methods of path length usually depend on measurement of the acoustic centers of the transducers. Based on the definition that the acoustic center is the position of the point from which the sound pressure varies inversely as distance [9, 10] , most results presented in the literature have been determined from deviations of the amplitude of the sound pressure [11] . Cox attempted to measure the acoustic centers of various transducers using a dismantled lathe bed for positioning the scanning microphone [12] . The comparisons of acoustic centers among several European laboratories were summarized by Rasmussen and Olsen [13] . Juhl [14] measured the acoustic centers by using the boundary value technique and assuming a parabolic movement of the diaphragms. Barrera-Figueroa et al. [15] presented an experimental procedure to determine the position of the acoustic centers of the microphones. Shaw and Hodnett [16] described some typical issues related to calibration and measurement of therapeutic medical ultrasonic equipment. A theoretical model for the transfer characteristics of a hydrophone has been developed, which can help to calculate the system latency [17] . However, the methods mentioned above mainly focused on calibrating the characteristics of the transducers, rather than the ultrasonic system directly. The calibration procedure is very complex, and it is difficult to achieve high calibration performance. This paper proposes a promising calibration method to determine the path length and the system latency of an ultrasonic system for temperature measurement. Calibration equations on the path length and the system latency are presented by estimating the TD between the transmitted signal and received signal at several different temperatures, and the calibrated results are determined simultaneously based on the least squares algorithm. Distilled water is employed as the medium to perform the experiment keeping in a stable temperature environment with an accuracy of 0.01°C. To achieve highly accurate TD estimation, a continuous wave modulated by maximum length sequence is adopted, and a hybrid method is employed by incorporating both cross-correlation and phase shift. According to the basic calibration principle, the given TD uncertainty and the thermometer uncertainty, the formulas for calculating the path length uncertainty and the system latency uncertainty are presented, and the uncertainty propagation coefficients are also deduced. To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, the calibrated results are used in ultrasonic temperature measurement, which shows the temperature accuracy is significantly improved.
In Ref. [7] , the authors proposed a promising method for ultrasonic temperature measurement. and the problem of system calibration was also mentioned. In this section, a brief overview is given. The graphic abstract of temperature measurement is shown in Fig 1. If equation C = f(T) represents the inner dependence between the temperature (T) and the ultrasound velocity (C), then T can be determined when C is measured
where f −1 () denotes the mapping relationship from the ultrasound velocity to the temperature. Signal source drives the transmitter to produce sound wave, which is captured by the receiver after propagation in the medium. A hybrid technique is adopted to estimate the TD between the transmitted signal and received signal by incorporating both cross-correlation and phase shift. Combining the estimated TD and the calibrated results of the ultrasonic system, the ultrasound velocity of the medium can be expressed as following:
where D and τ sys represent the path length and the system latency, respectively. The temperature to be measured is determined by
Accurate temperature is achievable on the basis of estimating TD accurately. And the inaccurate representation of D and τ sys should be carefully considered. This paper is to calibrate the path length D and the system latency τ sys exactly.

TD estimation between the transmitted signal and the received signal is performed at M different known temperatures. The calibration equations on D and τ sys are presented as following:
where TD m denotes the estimated time delay of the m-th temperature, and e m is the corresponding estimation error. f(T m ) denotes the ultrasound velocity related to the temperature T m , which is measured in advance. By using the least squares which is an optimal algorithm of parameter estimation for linear models [18] , the calibrated path length (D) and system latency 
To ensure that Eq (5) can be deduced from Eq (4), the matrix A should has a full column rank, which requires f(T) to be a monotone function as T ranges from T 1 to T M . And accurate system calibration is achievable on the basis of estimating time delay and temperature accurately.
The experimental setup is shown in Fig 2. It is a typical ultrasonic system for temperature measurement within the dashed box that consists of two transducers, a signal transceiver module and a PC. The transmitter and the receiver both use Vico's WK-21B acoustic piezoelectric transducers, which work at 1 MHz and have an operating temperature within 5°C * 110°C. The transducers are fixed on a steel framework face to face. The primary functions of the transceiver module, shown in Fig 2(c) , include signal storage, signal transmission and signal receiving. The FPGA (XILINX XC6SLX45) works as a core function jointed with a 100M-Base PHY (LXT971ALE), an ADC (ADS2806Y), a DAC (DAC2932PFB), dual DDR (MT46V64M8TG) and other external ports. The transmitted signal, generated by the PC, is downloaded through the Ethernet to the DDR. System starts when the PC sends a trigger command. The DAC converts the digital signal from DDR into an analog signal to drive the transmitter. The ADC, with a sampling rate at 10 Msps, works synchronously with the DAC, and the sampled signal is fed back to the DDR and uploaded to the PC for further processing.
Distilled water is selected as the medium to carry out the system calibration from two aspects of concern. First, it is widely accepted that the mapping function between the ultrasound velocity and the temperature in distilled water is sufficiently accurate. Additionally, the temperature of liquid such as distilled water has potential to be accurately measured by a mercuric thermometer, and the changes of temperature can be easily controlled. In 1972, Del Grosso first provided the ultrasound velocity equation of distilled water [19] , and it was approximated by a polynomial [20] :
where T is the temperature in degrees Celsius, k 0 = 0.140238744 × 10 . As shown in Fig 3, it is one to one relationship between C and T, which is a basic requirement of our proposed calibration method.
The two transducers are fully immersed into the distilled water, and the temperature is measured using a mercuric thermometer, manufactured by Jing Chuang Instrument (model WNG-01) with a typical accuracy of 0.01°C. A thermostatic water bath (BILOW-GDW-2011B) is used to monitor and control the temperature of tap water, which exchanges heat with the distilled water. Highly constant and accurate temperature of the distilled water is achievable on the basis of following techniques: (1) The ultrasound wave is not transmitted until the temperature stays at the target point for 10 minutes, which contributes to constructing a stable and uniform temperature environment. (2) By using a transmitted signal that consists of 40 sets of continuous wave, 40 TD estimations are completed in less than a second. In such a short period, the temperature of the distilled water is nearly constant. (3) At the moment of signal transmitting, the thermometer readings are recorded as soon as possible to ensure the accuracy of the temperature. Additionally, air conditioning in the laboratory is also turned on and set at the same temperature to reduce the temperature difference between the air and the distilled water.
At each temperature, an ultrasound wave is transmitted by the transmitter, and received by the receiver after propagation in the distilled water. To achieve highly accurate TD estimation, a continuous wave modulated by maximum length sequence is adopted for echo suppression to increase the available length of the received signal, and a hybrid technique incorporating both cross-correlation and phase shift is employed. Cross-correlation initially, based on the transmitted and received signals, produces a rough TD to eliminate the phase ambiguity, and then phase shift refines this rough value to estimate TD with higher accuracy [7] .

We carried out system calibration at 7 different temperatures (M = 7) ranging from 18°C to 42°C, and TD estimation was repeated 40 times at each temperature. The average of estimated TD, summarized in Table 1 , decreases with the increasing of the temperature and has a standard deviation of less than 0.3 ns. Based on Eqs (5) and (6), the path length and the system latency are determined as D = 185.2265 mm and τ sys = 9.0171 μs, respectively.
Uncertainty analysis plays a crucial role in evaluation of the calibration performance, and it can help to find out which parameter has the biggest effect and which need only to be roughly given.
The calibrated path length and system latency, from Eq (5), can be formally expressed as where f D () and f τ () represent the functions to determine the path length and the system latency, respectively. Because temperature measurement and TD estimation are independent, both path length uncertainty (u D ) and system latency uncertainty (u τ ) can be decomposed into two parts:
where u D1 and u D2 are the path length uncertainties introduced by temperature measurement and TD estimation, respectively. u τ1 and u τ2 are the system latency uncertainties introduced by temperature measurement and TD estimation, respectively. Moreover, the inner dependence of uncertainty propagation is strictly proportional, such that
where u T denotes the temperature uncertainty, α T−D and α T−τ are the propagation coefficients to introduce u T to u D1 and u τ1 , respectively. u TD denotes the TD uncertainty, α TD−D and α TD−τ are the propagation coefficients to introduce u TD to u D2 and u τ2 , respectively. These coefficients are determined by [21] 
The detailed uncertainty of the experiment is shown in Table 2 . The temperature uncertainty (u T ) only depends on the accuracy of the mercuric thermometer. Generally, the temperature error satisfies a uniform distribution within ±0.01°C, so we have u T ¼ 0:01= ffiffi ffi 3 p % 0:006
. The TD uncertainty (u TD ) is less than 0.3 ns, which depends on the parameters of the received signal, such as the signal-to-noise ratio, the carrier frequency and the signal length [22] . The uncertainties of the calibrated path length and system latency are close to 0.058 mm and 0.038 μs, respectively. And the temperature measurement has the biggest effect which is approximately 4 times bigger than the effect of TD estimation. To improve the calibration performance, three techniques are useful: (1) using a thermometer with higher accuracy; (2) improving the performance of TD estimation; (3) improving the calibration equations to reduce the uncertainty propagation coefficients.
To further validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, the calibrated results are used in ultrasonic temperature measurement. The experiment was performed at 13 different temperatures ranging from 18°C to 42°C, and the temperature, measured by the mercuric thermometer, is regarded as the reference true value. Another experiment was also carried out for comparison, where the system latency remained unchanged (τ sys = 9.0171 μs), but the path length was measured by a slide caliper ruler with a typical accuracy of 0.02 mm. The measured path length is D = 184.80 mm. Fig 4 presents the results of measured temperature, where temperature in abscissa represents the reference true value determined by the thermometer. It is shown that the measured temperature, using calibrated results, is highly close to the reference true value. However, system error appears obviously when the path length is measured by a slide caliper ruler. And the system error, shown in Fig 5(a) , increases with the rise of the temperature, which is up to 2.211°C when the temperature is 41.957°C. Fig 5(b) shows the temperature error by using the calibrated results, where the temperature accuracy is significantly improved. The temperature error consistently remains within ±0.04°C, and the percentage error is less than 0.15%.
This paper presents a promising calibration method of an ultrasonic system for temperature measurement. And the following conclusions can be made:
• By estimating TD between the transmitted signal and received signal at several different temperatures, the calibration equations are presented, and the path length and the system latency are determined simultaneously based on the least squares algorithm; • The formulas for calculating the calibration uncertainties are given, and the uncertainty propagation coefficients are also deduced, which plays a crucial role in finding out which parameter would have the biggest effect and which need only to be roughly considered;
• Both calibration experiment and validation experiment were performed in the distilled water in a stable temperature environment with an accuracy of 0.01°C;
• The proposed method calibrates the path length and the system latency with uncertainties of 0.058 mm and 0.038 μs, respectively. With the use of the calibrated results, the performance of temperature measurement is significantly improved. The temperature error consistently remains within ±0.04°C, and the percentage error is less than 0.15%.
Inadequate sleep is a pervasive problem in today's society. Insufficient sleep leads to decreased cognitive performance [1] , increased sleepiness [2] [3] [4] , reduced productivity [5] , and increased traffic accidents [6] . Moreover, inadequate sleep increases the susceptibility of individuals to adverse health outcomes, including cardiovascular deficits [7] , increased immune challenges [8, 9] , longer recovery times after injury [10] , increases in sympathetic tone [11, 12] , and reduced lifespan [7] . Given the number and severity of consequences that accompany inadequate sleep, it would be helpful to have a simple and reliable test to identify vulnerable individuals before they experience adverse consequences.
One approach to accomplish this objective has been to test candidate biomarkers to determine whether they are consistently altered in subjects with inadequate or insufficient sleep. Biomarkers are objective, often endogenous factors that report changes in body chemistry and correlate with either disease state or the severity of the disease. Several biomarkers, including eyelid closures [13] and balance [14] , as well as biochemical markers from blood [15, 16] , cerebral spinal fluid [17] [18] [19] , and breath analytes [20] have been evaluated as candidate biomarkers of disrupted sleep. Although each of these approaches has had limited success, assessment tools that can be used in real-world settings are not yet widely available. With that in mind, we have hypothesized that saliva, as a rich source of analytes, can be mined to identify biomarkers of sleepiness or inadequate sleep. Saliva is particularly well suited for monitoring sleepiness since it is a readily accessible biological fluid that can be easily collected using noninvasive procedures. Indeed, we have shown that transcripts for -amylase, Filamin-A, maleic enzyme, integrin, M, and integrin, 5, are all elevated in saliva samples following sleep deprivation [21] [22] [23] [24] . Increased levels of salivary -amylase activity have also been shown to correlate with increased sleepiness and decreased cognitive performance in an independent study [25] . However, since endogenous factors are frequently modulated by a variety of physiological conditions (stress, circadian time, etc.), test of sleepiness should be comprised of a panel of independent analytes. Several studies have found that serum markers of inflammation are elevated in populations of individuals with sleep disorders [9] . For example, serum levels of interleukin 6 (IL-6) [26] , interleukin 8 (IL-8) [27, 28] , tumor necrosis factor-(TNF-) [29] , C-reactive protein (CRP) [30] , intracellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) [31] , selectins [32] , and vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM) [31] have all been shown to increase in multiple populations of patients with sleep apnea. Therefore, we wanted to determine if levels of salivary inflammation transcripts could be used to identify sleepiness in a clinical population, individuals diagnosed with sleep apnea.

1. Subjects and Samples. 8 controls, 14 patients confirmed to have sleep apnea, and 18 patients that were suspected to have sleep apnea during their initial screen but did not exhibit sleep apnea during their overnight assessment (sleepy) were evaluated for salivary transcript levels. Both the sleep apnea group and the "sleepy" group were referred to the Washington University Sleep Laboratory due to excessive sleepiness. Samples were taken from patients at ∼9 pm after they had arrived at the sleep lab and prior to beginning polysomnography. The apnea/hypopnea index (AHI) was determined using polysomnography (PSG) as previously described [33] . Subjects were free from psychiatric disorders and prescription medicines [24] . Each subject was administered the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) and their body mass index (BMI) was calculated. BMI was unavailable for one subject in the "sleepy" group. Consent was received from all participants and all protocols were approved by the Washington University School of Medicine Institutional Review Board.
Saliva was taken and cDNA was generated according to the protocol previously described [24] . Briefly, saliva was obtained when subjects chewed on a salivette (Sarstedt, Newton, NC). One mL of RNAlater (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) was added to the salivette and immediately frozen on dry ice and stored at −80 ∘ C. At the time of transcript analysis, salivettes were thawed and the saliva-RNAlater extracts were extracted by centrifugation. RNA was purified from cell-free lysates and reversetranscribed using Superscript III (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Equal amounts of cDNA were loaded into an inflammation Taqman low density array (LDA) (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) and Taqman based qPCR was carried out using the 7600 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The LDAs were normalized to 18S RNA. Fold changes were determined using the method described in [34] , known as the comparative C method. Transcript levels for the gene of interest were first normalized within subject to 18S RNA. 
All demographic data is presented as average ± standard deviation. For transcript analysis, if a transcript was not detected in more than 77% of the group, the transcript was deemed undetectable and not analyzed. For all detectable genes, transcript levels for each subject were determined as a fold change from the average levels of the control group. Fold changes were converted to a log 2 scale. From the log data, average and standard error were calculated. Groups of interest were compared to control levels using a two-tailed, unpaired Student's t-test and the significance level was set at 0.05. values were corrected for multiple comparisons using the false discovery method (FDR) with a FDR level of 5% [35] . Transcript levels are presented as a geometric mean and standard error [36] . For ease of presentation, group data, including average, upper, and lower bounds, were then converted back to standard units by raising 2 to the power of the calculated value to obtain fold change values.

We evaluated 14 patients with sleep apnea (11 male and 3 female) and 8 control subjects (5 male and 3 female) for salivary transcriptional changes associated with sleep apnea. Control subjects did not have any prior existing sleep or mental disorders, were not on prescription medications, had not consumed caffeine, and had not eaten 1 hour prior to providing a saliva sample. Subject age was not different between the two groups ( Table 1 ). The subjects with sleep apnea had an average AHI of 48.5 ± 23.6 (mean ± S.D.). The subjects with sleep apnea had a significantly higher body mass index (BMI) than the controls. Consistent with previous results, subjects with sleep apnea also reported a higher score on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale.
We evaluated salivary transcript levels from subjects with sleep apnea and control subjects using low density arrays. The LDA platform simultaneously evaluates the levels of 96 RNA species. Of the 96 genes tested, 21 transcripts were detected in 11 or more sleep apnea patients. Fold changes from control and value for each gene are presented in Table 2 . The value listed was determined using a two-tailed Student's t-test comparing the controls to sleep apnea for all analyzed genes present in saliva. We performed a correction for multiple comparisons using a FDR set at 5%, which yielded a new value equivalent to = 0.0071 [35] . Compared to controls, 3 transcripts exhibited significant changes in patients with sleep apnea (Table 2) , ANXA1, 2M, and PTGS2 (see Table 2 for abbreviations). These results indicate that several inflammatory transcripts are increased in patients with sleep apnea.
To assess whether the increased inflammatory markers were due primarily to hypoxia or whether they might be more closely associated with increased sleepiness, we evaluated transcriptional changes in an independent group of people that entered the sleep lab suspected of having sleep apnea due to initial screening but ultimately had a normal AHI as determined by PSG (sleepy). The "sleepy" group was composed of 6 males and 12 females. By definition, all individuals in this group had an AHI less than 5. However, all subjects reported ESS scores significantly higher than controls and similar to the subjects with sleep apnea (Tables 1 and 3 ). "Sleepy" subjects had a similar age to controls but an increased BMI.
Sleepy" People. Twentyone transcripts were detected in the saliva of 14 or more "sleepy" patients. As above, to facilitate comparisons with the apnea patients reported in Table 2, Table 4 includes transcripts for fold changes for each of the 21 transcripts. After and FDR correction for multiple comparisons ( = 0.005), 2 transcripts were significantly changed in the "sleepy" population, CASP1 and PTGS2. PTGS2 can be considered an independent replicate of the apnea results and may deserve further consideration. Thus, inflammatory transcripts are elevated under conditions of EDS.
One possible explanation for elevated inflammatory transcripts is that both the sleep apnea and "sleepy" patients have a significantly higher BMI compared to controls. If the observed relationship is due solely to BMI, then patients with high BMI should have increased levels of inflammatory transcripts compared to patients with lower BMI. Similarly, we should detect a significant positive correlation between BMI and the level of salivary transcripts. To test this hypothesis we discretized the data by placing the subjects with a low BMI (≤30; = 24) into a single group and comparing them to subjects with a high BMI (>38; = 16). As seen in Table 5 , transcripts were not significantly different between subjects in the lower BMI group compared to their counterparts with a higher BMI. In addition, we evaluated the relationship between BMI and transcript levels using a Pearson correlation and found no significant correlations. Examples of transcript expression levels for the genes with the lowest values are plotted in Figure 1 as a function of BMI. These data indicate that, in this dataset, BMI does not account for increases in transcript levels in these patients.
In this paper, we report that salivary transcript levels of inflammatory genes are increased both in patients with sleep apnea and in an independent cohort of patients who self-identified as sleepy and were referred to the sleep lab suspected of having sleep apnea. We have previously used these same human low density arrays as a discovery tool to identify genes that are modified following acute sleep deprivation in healthy adults [24] . In that study, we reported that integrin, M (ITGAM), and annexin A3 (ANXA3) were significantly increased following 24 h and 30 h of waking. Interestingly, neither ITGAM nor ANXA3 were altered in either sleep apnea or "sleepy" subjects suggesting that they may be better suited for detecting acute sleep loss than for identifying patients with chronic sleep disruption. In contrast, salivary PTGS2 was significantly increased in both sleep apnea patients and in the "sleepy" cohort but was not affected by acute sleep deprivation [24] . Thus, these data support our previous proposal that a panel of biomarkers will be required to accurately identify sleep deprived individuals and further suggest that different sets of biomarkers may be required to distinguish between acute and chronic sleep disruptions.
Sleep apnea has been particularly difficult to diagnose and treat and the incidence of sleep apnea has been difficult to determine. Estimates of sleep apnea have ranged from as low as 2-4% to as high as 24% of middle aged men [37] , although other studies have estimated the likelihood of sleep apnea to be much higher still [38, 39] . Moreover, it has been suggested that sleep apnea is likely to be substantially underdiagnosed [38, 39] . Indeed, years may transpire between the onset of sleep apnea and the eventual diagnosis [40] . As the population ages and becomes more obese, the prevalence of sleep apnea is expected to increase even further [7, 41, 42] . During these intervening years, the severity and consequences of the sleep apnea may also increase [41, 42] . The associated Mediators of Inflammation 5 consequences of sleep apnea include increased daytime sleepiness [3] and an increased likelihood of automobile accidents [6] . Moreover, sleep apnea has been associated with a host of cardiovascular complications [43, 44] and increased rates of all-cause mortality [7] . Sleep apnea has also been associated with learning impairments [45] . The current gold standard of treatment, continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), may be able to reverse some of the consequences of sleep apnea, such as sleepiness [2] and restoration of typical sleep stages [2] , and may lower blood pressure [46] but the literature is less conclusive whether cognitive function is improved [4, 47] . Thus, a clinical goal is to have patients begin treatment for sleep apnea as soon as possible. A simple cost-effective biomarker that can be easily used at the point of care may be a useful tool to convince people to go to the sleep lab for a more precise diagnosis and treatment. Since biomarkers are both objective and quantifiable, they are well suited for persuading an individual that they may have an underlying affliction that needs greater attention. In that regard, it is important to note that the well-known relationship between inflammation and sleep deprivation is an advantage since many physicians are likely to be familiar with this relationship and thus more willing to incorporate such a biomarker into their treatment practices. That is, numerous inflammatory markers, including IL-6 [20, 26, 48], IL-8 [27, 28, 48] , TNF- [26] , CRP [49, 50] , monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) [27] , ICAM [27, 51] , selectins [51] , VCAM [51] , nitric oxide [52] , and isoprostane [20] , are elevated in body fluids of patients with sleep apnea. Moreover, proteomics have identified protein biomarkers in urine [53] . Interestingly, inflammatory markers have also been associated with sleep deprivation in serum [54, 55] and saliva in healthy adults [24] . In this study, transcript levels for PTGS2 were elevated in people with inadequate sleep. Our results parallel findings in mice in which transcript levels for PTGS2 are elevated after acute sleep deprivation [56] . PTGS2, along with PTGS1, is a critical enzyme in prostaglandin synthesis. Prostaglandins initiate a set of molecular cascades that result in an inflammatory response. PTGS2 is induced by several stimuli including proinflammatory signals and converts arachidonic acid to prostaglandin H2 [57] . Thus, PTGS2 plays a role in the inflammatory pathway in addition to being a candidate biomarker for EDS.
It is interesting to note that many studies compare sleep apnea patients to healthy controls. Although this approach has been quite successful, our data suggest that other patients with chronic sleep disruption may also experience some of the same outcomes as patients with sleep apnea. If this turns out to be the case, more generally, assessing chronically sleepy individuals along with patients that have sleep apnea The transcript levels were plotted against the log values of the transcript levels for each of the transcripts that were significant in the sleep apnea or "sleepy" groups. In addition the transcripts with the lowest value were plotted to determine if there was a significant correlation with increased weight. For each transcript, there was no significant correlation with increased BMI.
may facilitate the identification of precise deficits that are due specifically to sleep loss rather than other features of sleep apnea, such as hypoxia [48] . Nonetheless, our results emphasize that PTGS2 cannot distinguish between sleepy patients with and without sleep apnea. While this may seem disappointing, we believe that any diagnosis of a sleep disorder should be made by a qualified sleep physician after fully examining the patient. Indeed, it may not be possible to identify a biomarker that is specific to a single sleep disorder. One example of a promising biomarker is cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of hypocretin-1/orexin (HCRT), which has emerged from research in the narcolepsy field [18, 58] . CSF levels of hypocretin-1/orexin are lower in narcoleptic patients. But for patients without cataplexy, decreased CSF levels of HCRT are not as predictive, even in combination with the genetic marker DBQ. Moreover, decreases in CSF levels of HCRT are also associated now, being associated with other diseases, including dementia with Lewy Body [59] and Alzheimer's disease [60] and Kleine-Levin syndrome [58, 61] . This example illustrates the difficulty of a single biomarker with a given sleep disorder. Nonetheless, a biomarker that can help primary physicians to identify sleepy individuals may be extremely useful for ensuring that they get the appropriate care in a timely manner.
Our protocol has two aspects that may be useful for the real-world application of biomarkers to identify patients with sleep disorders. First, acquiring saliva is a noninvasive procedure and does not, for example, require a private location for sample collection (e.g., urine) or specialized skills to acquire samples (e.g., blood). As a consequence, salivary biomarkers can be readily used both on the roadside and in a doctor's office with equal effectiveness. A second advantage of our protocol is our focus on salivary RNA coupled with the LDA platform for the rapid detection of 96 transcripts simultaneously. LDAs may be an effective way to screen multiple targeted transcripts at once without the burden that NextGen sequencing frequently demands. One advantage of using transcript levels as the biomarker is that nucleotide probes can be generated quickly and are very specific for the target intended as opposed to having to design an antibody against a protein target. Given human variability, the different roles that genes can play throughout the body (pleiotropy), and the likelihood that a given analyte will be induced by a variety of environmental situations, it is likely that no single biomarker will be ideal for reliable diagnosis of sleep apnea. Nonetheless, our data suggest that PTGS2 may be a particularly good candidate for inclusion in a panel of biomarkers.
There are two potential weaknesses of our study. The first is the sample size of our groups. Low sample sizes may identify significant differences within the subgroup that does not generalize to the rest of the population. In this study, we have tried to balance the difficulty of completing discovery experiments with the expense of a human study. Although our sample size was low for sleep apnea subjects, we were able to confirm the changes in PTGS2 in a separate cohort of "sleepy" patients. This confirmation adds to our confidence that PTGS2 is a good candidate for followup studies. A second weakness of this study is that we were not able to control for the levels of BMI between our control subjects and patients with sleep apnea or the "sleepy" cohort. To address this issue, we discretized the subjects into groups with low or high BMI. Means testing between the two groups indicated the subjects with low and high BMI were not different from one another. Moreover, Pearson correlation between BMI and transcript levels did not reveal any significant associations. Finally, when examined as a whole, we could find no general trend of inflammatory genes being elevated in subjects with higher BMI. Thus, while BMI is a potential confounder, it did not appear to unduly influence the results of this study.
Biomarkers have the capacity to serve an important need in maintaining human health. They provide an objective insight into the goings-on of the body. In particular, there is a need to identify individuals with sleep problems that result in EDS. Given the difficulty in identifying individuals, the consequences of sleep apnea and other sleep disorders, and the potential that therapy possesses, objective biomarkers can be a way to convince people to go to the sleep lab for diagnosis. We have demonstrated the feasibility of using saliva to identify changes in inflammatory transcripts that correlate with the presence of EDS. Saliva is an ideal source of biofluid for a potential source of biomarkers. Obtaining saliva is a noninvasive and relatively inexpensive process. Further experiments in larger and independent populations will determine the precision and validity of these biomarkers, but these experiments demonstrate that saliva has the potential to be objective biomarkers to identify subjects with EDS.
T he heart adapts to increased demands for cardiac work by increasing muscle mass through the initiation of a hypertrophic response, which may be a consequence of alterations in specific signaling molecules and their downstream pathways in individual myocytes. Accordingly, identifying the signals that mediate the pathways from biomechanical stress to downstream cellular events is a major area of research interest. [1] [2] [3] Both myocytes and nonmyocytes are direct biomechanical sensors of hemodynamic load. 4, 5 Growth signals are generated by the release of growth factors and cytokines, which lead to a regionally localized response. The factors that have been implicated in this response include peptides that stimulate G protein-coupled receptors, such as endothelin-1 (ET-1) and angiotensin II (Ang II). 2, 3 According to in vitro results, the primary downstream effectors are the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), including the extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs), the Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs), and the p38 MAPKs. 6 At the genetic level, hemodynamic overload is associated with rapid (within 1 hour) and transient upregulation of immediate-early genes that encode transcription factors (cfos, c-jun, and Egr-1). 7 B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is also expressed at this early stage. 8, 9 In the medium term (12 to 24 hours), cardiomyocytes activate the fetal gene regulatory program with reexpression of genes for atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), skeletal muscle ␣-actin, and ␤-myosin heavy chain (␤-MHC). 2, 7, 10, 11 Several of the genes upregulated during hypertrophy are controlled by the cardiac-restricted zinc finger transcription factor GATA4, [12] [13] [14] and recent work has shown that GATA binding sites appear to be required for activation of ␤-MHC expression 15 and Ang II type 1a (AT 1A ) receptor expression 16 in response to pressure-overload hypertrophy in rats. Binding on AT 1A receptor and BNP GATA sites in extracts of hypertrophied but not control hearts was also noted, 16 suggesting that GATA binding activity is enhanced in the hypertrophied myocardium. The signaling cascades that affect GATA4 either in vitro or in vivo, however, are not known.
In the present study, to characterize the time course of induction of cardiac GATA activity, we measured hemody-namics and left ventricular GATA mRNA levels and BNP GATA binding activity at 15 minutes, 30 minutes, 1 hour, 2 hours, and 4 hours after pressure overload produced by intravenous infusion of arginine 8 -vasopressin (AVP) in conscious normotensive rats. We also assessed the effects of the mixed ET A /ET B receptor antagonist bosentan and the AT 1 receptor antagonist losartan on the increase of BNP GATA binding activity to determine whether ET-1 or Ang II plays a causal role in the induction of GATA DNA binding activity by pressure overload in ventricles. Furthermore, the actions of ET-1 and Ang II receptor antagonism on BNP GATA activity under basal conditions (without pressure overload) in conscious rats as well as ET-1 and bosentan effects in myocyte cultures were analyzed.

Bosentan was from F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, and Actelion Ltd, Allschwil, Switzerland (Dr Martine Clozel) and losartan from DuPont Merck Pharmaceutical Company, Wilmington, Del (Dr Ronald D. Smith).
The 2-month-old Sprague-Dawley rats were instrumented as previously described. 9 The experiments were started by measurement of mean arterial pressure (MAP) and heart rate in the conscious rats for 30 minutes before baseline hemodynamic measurements were made. Then, AVP (Peninsula Laboratories Europe, 0.05 g ⅐ kg Ϫ1 ⅐ min Ϫ1 IV) or vehicle (0.9% NaCl IV) was infused at 37.5 L/min for 15 minutes, 30 minutes, 1 hour, 2 hours and 4 hours. In a separate series of experiments, bosentan (10 mg/kg), losartan (10 mg/kg), or vehicle (0.9% NaCl) was injected as an intravenous bolus (injection volume 0.1 mL/100 g body wt), followed by 30 minutes of vehicle or AVP infusion. Left ventricles and right atria were prepared for the mRNA determinations and gel mobility shift assays at the end of infusions as previously described. 9 The experimental design was approved by the Animal Use and Care Committee of the University of Oulu.
Myocytes were prepared from 1-to 3-day-old neonatal rat hearts as described earlier. 17 After 48 hours of incubation in complete serumfree medium (CSFM), 17 the medium was replaced with CSFM or CSFM supplemented with ET-1 100 nmol/L 18 or bosentan 10 mol/L for 15 minutes, 30 minutes, 1 hour, and 4 hours.
Nuclear extracts were prepared from atrial and ventricular tissue of AVP-or vehicle-infused rats and from neonatal rat myocytes as described previously. 19, 20 Double-stranded synthetic oligonucleotides containing GATA (5Ј-TGTGTCTGATAAATCAGAGATAAC-CCCACC-3Ј) or AP-1 (5Ј-GGAAGTGTTTTTGATGAGTCACC-CCA-3Ј) motifs of the rat BNP promoter were labeled with [␣-32 P]dCTP. Binding reactions contained 30 g of crude nuclear extract or 6 g of nuclear extract from cardiac myocytes and 2 g of poly-(dI-dC) ⅐ (dI-dC) in a buffer containing (in mmol/L) HEPES 10 (pH 7.9), MgCl 2 1, KCl 50, DTT 1, EDTA 0.1, and PMSF 0.25; 10% glycerol; 0.025% NP-40; and 1 mol/L each of aprotinin, leupeptin, and pepstatin; and when appropriate, various molar excesses of unlabeled double-stranded oligonucleotides. Reactions were carried out at room temperature for 20 minutes, and protein-DNA complexes were separated by electrophoresis on 5% polyacrylamide gel in 0.5ϫ TBE (Tris-borate-EDTA buffer) at 4°C. Nonlabeled double-stranded oligonucleotides corresponding to GATA or AP-1 binding sites of the BNP promoter and a GATA consensus sequence (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were used as specific competitor DNAs. Nonspecific competitor DNAs included a double-stranded oligo carrying the mutated binding site for GATA4 (5Ј-TGTGTCTGGTAAATCAGA GGTAACCCCACC-3Ј) and Oct-1 as nonrelated DNA. For supershift experiments, 1 g of goat polyclonal GATA4, GATA5, GATA6, c-Fos (4) 
RNA was isolated by the guanidine thiocyanate-CsCl method. 9 For the RNA Northern blot analysis, 20-g samples of RNA from the ventricles were separated by electrophoresis and transferred to nylon membranes. A 390-bp fragment of rat BNP cDNA, 21 cDNA probes for rat GATA4 (1417 bp), GATA6 (1175 bp), c-fos (1050 bp), and GAPDH and an oligonucleotide probe complementary to rat 18S ribosomal RNA were labeled, and the membranes were hybridized as described previously. 9
The BNP radioimmunoassay was performed as previously described. 9 The sensitivity of the assay was 2 fmol/tube, and 50% displacements of the respective standard curve occurred at 25 fmol/tube. The intra-assay and interassay variations were Ͻ10% and Ͻ15%, respectively. Serial dilutions of the tissue extracts showed parallelism with the standards. Tissue BNP is expressed as a concentration per milligram wet weight.
The results are expressed as meanϮSEM. For the comparison of statistical significance between 2 groups, Student's t test was used. The hemodynamic variables were analyzed with 1-way ANOVA, followed by Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc test. A value of PϽ0.05 was considered statistically significant.

To study the signaling cascades responsible for the activation of transcription factors during pressure overload, an in vivo model of intravenous administration of AVP for up to 4 hours in conscious normotensive rats was used. 8, 9 MAP rose rapidly and reached maximum value within 15 minutes during AVP infusion, associated with a significant decrease in heart rate ( Figure 1 ). The AVP-induced increase in blood pressure was followed by an increase in the BNP mRNA levels in both the epicardial and endocardial layers of the left ventricle ( Figure  2A) . A 1.7-fold and 3.5-fold increase in left ventricular endocardial BNP mRNA levels was noted after 1 and 4 hours of AVP infusion, respectively ( Figure 2B ). The rapid activation of BNP mRNA gene expression resulted in a significant increase in left ventricular endocardial immunoreactive BNP peptide levels at 2 (from 167Ϯ14 to 260Ϯ12 pmol/g, PϽ0.001) and 4 (from 193Ϯ13 to 332Ϯ10 pmol/g, PϽ0.001) hours of AVP infusion. Under these experimental conditions, AVP infusion has no effect on right atrial BNP mRNA levels and right atrial pressure, 8 supporting the hypothesis that AVP has no direct effect on cardiac BNP gene expression.
Gel mobility shift assays were used to analyze the transacting factors that interact with the GATA or AP-1 motifs of the BNP promoter. AVP infusion for 15 minutes increased DNA binding activity in left ventricular extracts with a 30-bp double-stranded oligonucleotide probe containing the Ϫ90 BNP GATA sites (rBNP-90 GATA probe), and at 30 minutes, a 2.2-fold increase (from 1.96Ϯ0.27 to 4.33Ϯ0.75 arbitrary densitometric units, PϽ0.001) was noted ( Figure  3A) . The BNP GATA binding activity also increased in response to 1-hour AVP infusion, whereas at 2 or 4 hours, BNP GATA binding activity remained unchanged. Furthermore, AVP infusion for 15 minutes to 4 hours had no significant effect on DNA binding activity in right atrial nuclear extracts (at 30 minutes: 3.60Ϯ2.51 versus 4.55Ϯ3.03 arbitrary densitometric units, PϭNS, nϭ6), suggesting that the observed changes in BNP GATA binding activity are related to hemodynamic effects of AVP.
To determine the specificity of ventricular GATA binding activity, competition analyses were performed ( Figure 3B ). The formation of complexes with the rBNP-90 GATA probe was effectively inhibited by the unlabeled self ( Figure 3B , lanes 2 to 4) and GATA consensus DNA ( Figure 3B, lane7) , indicating that the DNA-protein complex was the result of a specific interaction. The binding was unaffected by an excess of oligonucleotides corresponding to the nonrelated competitor DNA Oct-1 ( Figure 3B , lane 5) or the mutated BNP GATA site ( Figure 3B, lane 6) . To further confirm that the complex bound to the BNP GATA site contains GATA proteins, supershift assays were carried out using GATA4 ( Figure 3C, lanes 3 and 4) , GATA5 ( Figure 3C , lanes 5 and 6), and GATA6 ( Figure 3C, lanes 7 and 8) antibodies. Experiments using rat ventricular extracts from vehicle-or AVP-infused rats clearly showed antibody-induced supershift of the GATA4 but not GATA5 or GATA6 complexes.
Unlike GATA4, the level of BNP AP-1 binding activity was not increased in nuclear extracts from the vehicle-and AVP-infused rat hearts within 15 minutes to 4 hours ( Figure  3A) . Weak supershifts were observed with JunB (N-17) and JunD (329) antibodies, which demonstrate the presence of JunB and JunD in the complex formed between the BNP AP-1 site and proteins in AVP-infused rat heart nuclear extracts (data not shown), as reported previously in extracts from rat hearts 2 days after coarctation. 16
We next examined the possibility that the increase in GATA activity could result from an increase in the expression of the GATA4 gene itself or an increase in the stability of the message. Northern blot analysis with both rat GATA4 and GATA6 probes identified a single 3.3-kb and 1.8-kb mRNA species, respectively, in the ventricles of adult rats. Pressure overload had no effect on left ventricular GATA4 or GATA6 mRNA levels during 15-minute to 4-hour AVP infusions (Figure 2A and 2B) . In contrast, expression of c-fos mRNA, which is another early hallmark of the hypertrophic re-sponse, 22 increased markedly in response to pressure overload (Figure 2A ).
To identify the mechanism by which pressure overload increases GATA4 binding activity, the roles of ET-1 and Ang II were evaluated in a series of experiments in which bosentan and losartan injections were used. When nuclear extracts from bosentan-and bosentan plus AVP-infused rat ventricles were used in gel mobility shift reactions containing the labeled rBNP-90 GATA probe, specific complexes were obtained ( Figure 4A ). The pressure overload-induced increase in GATA binding activity was completely inhibited by the mixed ET A /ET B receptor antagonist bosentan ( Figure 4A and 4B), whereas the AT 1 receptor antagonist losartan had no inhibitory effect on BNP GATA binding activity (data not shown). Bosentan alone had no statistically significant effect on BNP GATA binding activity ( Figure 4A and 4B) . Previously, we showed that in conscious rats, bosentan at a dose of 10 mg/kg IV completely blocked any increase in MAP produced by big ET-1 infusion and losartan at a concentration of 10 mg/kg completely blocked any increase in MAP produced by Ang II infusion. 9 Furthermore, injections of bosentan and losartan did not significantly alter the hemody- namic responses evoked by AVP infusion (data not shown 9 ), thus allowing us to examine the direct action of load versus a requirement for ET-1 and Ang II to mediate pressure overload-induced increase in GATA binding activity.
The specific complexes were observed in gel mobility shift assays of nuclear extracts prepared from cultured rat neonatal cardiomyocytes. As shown in Figure 4C , ET-1 treatment for 15 to 60 minutes produced an increase in DNA binding activity using rBNP-90 GATA probe. This rapid increase in BNP GATA binding activity in cultured cardiomyocytes was inhibited by the mixed ET A /ET B antagonist bosentan ( Figure  4C, lane 6) . GATA4 mRNA levels remained unchanged in ET-1-treated cultured cardiac myocytes ( Figure 4D ).
Although numerous transcription factors have been implicated in the activation of cardiac genes in response to hypertrophy, 1, 3, 13, 14 how hypertrophic signal transduction pathways are linked to changes in cardiac gene expression is not known. The transcription factors GATA4, -5, and -6 have been shown to activate numerous hypertrophic marker genes 13, 15 containing GATA binding sites required for cardiac-specific expression. It has also been shown that GATA4 DNA binding activity is upregulated in hypertrophied rat hearts 7 days after aortic coarctation. 16 We have previously documented that acute pressure overload produced by AVP infusion is a potent activator of BNP gene expression in the adult rat heart. 9 The present study extends those findings by demonstrating that (1) ventricular BNP GATA4 but not GATA5 and GATA6 binding is activated at a very early stage of pressure overload, well before the development of left ventricular hypertrophy; and (2) the activation of the endothelin signaling pathway plays an important role in mediating pressure overload-dependent GATA4 binding activation.
The mechanisms by which pressure overload is transduced by the cardiac muscle cell and translated into myocyte hypertrophic response remain only partially understood. At the cellular level, hypertrophy is thought to develop in response to a combination of mechanical (hemodynamic load) and neurohumoral stimuli, such as Ang II, ET-1, and adrenergic agents. 4, 5 It has been reported that mechanical stretch is coupled with cellular release of Ang II and ET-1 and that they act as chemical mediators of stretch-induced myocyte hypertrophy in cultured rat cardiomyocytes. 23, 24 The production of ET-1 has also been shown to increase in the hypertrophied rat heart in various models of pressure overload. [25] [26] [27] Thus, endogenous cardiac production of ET-1 may play a functional role in mechanical load-induced cardiac gene expression.
A key finding of the present study was that the rapid increase in GATA4 binding activity in cardiac nuclear extracts in response to pressure overload is mediated by ET-1 but not Ang II. The source of ET-1 in the heart may be myocytes or nonmyocytes. It has been shown that endothelial cells to some extent contain stores of ET-1, 28, 29 and when endothelial cells in culture are stretched, ET-1 can be released rapidly. 28 In addition, mRNA levels of ET-1 increase by stretching of cardiac myocytes, 24 ET-1 receptor antagonists decrease hemodynamic load-induced ANP release in vivo, 30 and mechanical strain induces human BNP promoter activity in vitro. 31 Thus, pressure-overload stimulus, by increasing wall stress, appears to release ET-1 from preformed stores, which then participates in the regulation of GATA4 binding activity. In the present study, the increase in GATA4 binding activity was transient, suggesting that cardiac ET-1 stores may be limited. Whether ET-1 is also involved in controlling GATA4 binding activity in chronic pressure overload in vivo remains to be determined.
Several signaling pathways, including intracellular calcium, protein kinase C, nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinases, and calcineurin, may be involved in the initiation and maintenance of myocyte hypertrophy. 3, 6, 32 There is also considerable evidence that activation of any of the 3 MAPK cascades can lead to a hypertrophic response in myocytes and that these MAPK subfamilies are activated by ET-1. 18, 33 The activation of ERK, JNK, and p38 MAPK has been demonstrated after the application of mechanical strain in cultured myocytes. 32, 34 -36 Using neonatal rat ventricular myocytes, we found that SB-203580, a potent p38 MAPK inhibitor, inhibited the ET-1-induced increase in BNP GATA4 binding activity (R. Kerkelä, S. Pikkarainen, N. Hautala, H. Ruskoaho, unpublished observation). This result, together with the observation that the p38 MAPK accounted for 50% of the human BNP promoter strain response in neonatal rat ventricular myocyte cultures, 36 suggests that the p38 MAPK pathway might also mediate the early increase of GATA4 activity in pressure overload in vivo.
Previous studies have shown that the activation of rat BNP promoter in cardiac myocytes required GATA binding sites in the promoter. 37 Furthermore, mechanical strain stimulates the activity of a transfected human BNP gene promoter in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes, 38 and this stimulation appears to be derived in part from a direct effect on the cardiac myocyte and in part from an autocrine/paracrine pathway that involves the sequential generation of Ang II and ET-1. 31 However, the inability of the ET-receptor antagonist bosentan to inhibit the early activation of ventricular BNP gene expression in response to pressure overload in vivo 9 suggests that there is a requirement for additional transcription factors that probably act in concert with GATA4 to activate BNP gene expression. In vitro, other transcription factors, such as NF-B 36 and NF-AT, 39 are also important for BNP gene expression, and recent work has suggested that ANP expression may be regulated by cooperative interaction of cis-acting elements with GATA4 and Csx/Nkx2.5. 40 The potential interaction of these transcription factors with GATA4 in promoting the changes in cardiac gene expression during pressure overload represents a logical target for future study.
In conclusion, this study shows for the first time that ET-1 acts as a mediator of GATA4 binding activity in pressure overload. This may represent a new mechanism for transduction of extrinsic hypertrophic signals to the nucleus in pressure-overload hypertrophy as well as in other pathophys-iological conditions associated with high ET-1 activity, such as heart failure and myocardial ischemia.
As the patient safety agenda has evolved in primary care over the past decade, completion and application of learning on safety and quality methods has become an important component of the general practice (GP) specialty training curriculum and of appraisal and revalidation. [1, 2] The RCGP patient safety curriculum describes the expertise required to practice as a GP in the United Kingdom (UK) and can act as a guide to learning at any career Practice, is now embedded within most GP practices in the UK. [3] [4] [5] Despite this focus on reflecting on care and improving patient safety, firm evidence that patients are now safer is lacking. [6, 7] Berwick's influential report "A promise to learn -a commitment to act" stated that, in the vast majority of cases, NHS staff were not to blame for patient safety problems. [8] He emphasised the effect of systems and work conditions on staff performance and that, in certain high profile cases, indicators of impending problems had been ignored. Further, it is argued that a new way of thinking about safety is needed which moves beyond viewing safety through the lens of problems, error and failure. [9] This suggests we should be attempting to understand and teach how safety is achieved in the complex conditions and systems found in healthcare.
In our previous article we described key concepts for those involved in teaching or performing safety and improvement work. [10] In this article we explore some of these concepts in more depth to aid their application and teaching. The field of Resilience Engineering has given rise to a new way of thinking about patient safety now commonly referred to as 'Safety-II'. [11, 12] This approach attempts to explain and potentially resolve some of the intractable problems associated with complex systems such as those found in primary care, which traditional safety management thinking and responses (termed Safety-I) have struggled to adequately understand and improve upon. If successfully conceptualised, taught and implemented, this approach may lead to better reflection by trainees and qualified GPs (and wider primary care teams) on how everyday success is achieved in the challenging working conditions found in general practice thus allowing more effective change to increase the safety of healthcare systems.
In primary care, safety and improvement techniques such as Significant Event Analysis (SEA), criterion audit and Plan Do Study Act (PDSA) cycles are employed by practitioners to provide evidence of Quality Improvement (QI) activity for medical appraisal and to satisfy the requirement of workplace based assessment for specialty trainees. [13] All approaches are based on orthodox Safety-I principles, which typically involve an attempt to quantify and analyse incidences of patient harm (or incidents or hazards that have the potential to lead to harm). Incident investigation techniques such as SEA and Root Cause Analysis (RCA) attempt to understand why adverse events occurred by detecting deviations from 'ideal' practice and to design change to prevent recurrence. [14] This is essentially a 'find and fix' mentality where we attempt to isolate specific causal events and rectify such malfunctions so that the accident or incident trajectory that we have identified cannot occur in the future. The logic in this approach allows for unreliable technology and fallible clinical staff to be treated much the same, namely as potentially problematic components that can either function as intended (behave as designed, follow protocols etc.) or not (breakdown, deviate, violate). Errors are thus seen as variability in human performance that should be constrained or eliminated, much like oiling a valve that will not shut and retesting it to check its reliability. The 'fix' for events involving healthcare staff is predominantly a recommended change to protocol or procedure, or the imposition of warnings/reminders or physical barriers aimed at reducing the likelihood of the incident recurring. [15] .
This approach is manifest directly in criterion based audit and PDSA cycles, which become synonymous with increasing conformity with evidence-based protocols, often focussing on the behaviour of individuals, in an attempt to reduce the number of unwanted outcomes. It is presumed that if all components of a system, including the humans, function as specified, then nothing will go wrong.
The RCGP curriculum includes reflecting on the complex interactions found in healthcare systems and how these can affect patient safety. Current QI and incident investigation methods were often developed in industries that are arguably less complex than healthcare.
They were designed for use in systems (for example, car production lines) where it is often possible to reduce systems to their component parts and understand how each part functions and relates to other parts. In these systems, effect follows cause in a more or less predictable (linear) way. In contrast, everyday primary healthcare systems are complex adaptive systems. Here, effects can be damped or amplified given similar input (non-linear) because of dynamic networks of interacting components. [16] [17] [18] The concept of 'close coupling' means that even small changes in one component can cause a large and unpredictable change in another component. The sociotechnical systems perspective is concerned precisely with the multiple complex interactions and interdependencies between humans (e.g. patients and clinicians and clinicians and colleagues) and technological components (e.g. medical equipment and computerisation) which give rise to expected and unexpected outcomes. [19] Another feature of complexity is that, unlike many mechanical systems (such as car engines or washing machines), healthcare is a relatively 'open' system in that there are many external agents and the boundaries of influence are hard to define. [16] In primary care the functioning of a system may be influenced by regulators, contractual arrangements, secondary care, nursing homes, social work, carers, the media, the time of year and even the weather. In open systems the prompts from wider conditions can change rapidly and in an unpredictable manner. For example, staff may face changes in demand and capacity from new regulation, political change, technological breakthroughs etc.
The complexity in healthcare systems continues to increase with, for example, more complex job roles, integration of new technology and an expanding multidisciplinary team.
An example of system complexity is described in Box 1.
Resilience Engineering argues that things usually go right because people adjust their performance to the everyday conditions they face. [11] In this way complex systems maintain functioning to allow continued success even when prevailing work conditions mean existing practice/ protocols may be confounded. The presentation of clinical problems is rarely fully specified in available guidelines and protocols. Ways of 'getting things done' form around plans and guides rather than directly through them. People are actually very adept when faced with conditions to which standard ways of working seem misaligned. [20] They anticipate problems and adapt their behaviour by making adjustments to their work in an attempt to continue to achieve success. Performance adjustments are essential for successful functioning in complex systems and differential response should not be automatically seen as unwanted deviations from some idealised norm. Rather, adaptation is often a necessary response to complexity, and in many cases a way to mitigate problems and achieve success.
If you take a process such as driving a car as an example, constant adjustment is required to adapt performance to the changing and unexpected conditions (e.g. the actions of others, temporary speed restrictions, traffic lights changing to red, a heavy downpour). Drivers constantly monitor conditions and anticipate and respond to problems to prevent accidents, thereby ensuring safety for themselves and others. They learn from these experiences and so in the future find it easier to monitor, anticipate and adapt. If a standard operating procedure was devised for driving (a seemingly routine task for most people) it would be an enormous challenge to specify all the conditions that could be faced by a driver and a desirable timely response set for each. [21] Primary healthcare guidelines can be helpful but they rarely account for all possible variations of conditions. For example, the management of patients with hypertension varies with their co-morbidities, current medication, their past experience, personal preferences, expectations and perhaps even their personality. It may also vary with the resources available, such as 24 hour or home monitoring systems, equipment and staff to perform an ECG, or current availability of medication. [22] Some of these may be included in guidance but by definition guidance gives a general overview and cannot specific what to do for every intricate case.
The incorporation of patient preference is an important part of the RCGP curriculum and is included in many guidelines. The experience and confidence gained in working as a GP often enhances our ability to make decisions tailored in an individual manner for each patient, thus varying how work is completed. The sheer range of conditions we face means each set will often not have been previously considered to allow specific actions to be included in guidelines. Due to this, adjustments made by healthcare workers are approximate.
Adjustments include workarounds and trade-offs. Workarounds are used when people do not have all the information or equipment that they require; trade-offs are necessary when staff have to cope with competing goals. One well known trade-off is the EfficiencyThoroughness-Trade-Off (ETTO). [23] Examples of ETTOs include signing prescriptions that are not on the patient's normal 'repeat' list without reviewing the patient, or dealing with problems through telephone consultation when it may have been 'best practice' to see and examine the patient. In complex systems, conditions are constantly changing and performance adjustments are constantly required to achieve success. Dealing with this uncertainty is another important area in which trainees need to gain experience. [24] Otherwise, when faced with situations that don't 'fit' the best practice ideal, they will be 'frozen' and unable to act in the best interests of the patient.
In traditional Safety-I thinking, safety is defined almost completely by the absence of something -the point where as few things as possible go wrong. This is achieved precisely by reduction-examining these 'wrong things' and repairing them. Safety-II aims to increase safety by maximising the number of events with a successful outcome. This means the unit of analysis goes beyond adverse events to studying how things happen under different conditions. This leads to an appreciation of system complexity that may improve incident investigation and quality improvement efforts, and may allow development of more relevant prospective methods to improve safety. Although adverse events are not uncommon (reports suggest one in ten patients admitted to hospital and one to two percent of primary care consultations) it is still true that things usually go right for the vast majority of health care provided. [25, 26] Understanding why they usually go right may allow us to learn more or different things about our systems.
Current incident investigation techniques (such as SEA and RCA) often work backwards from an event until one or more 'malfunctioning' components are found such as deviations from protocol or a technical problem with equipment. It is often presumed that this 'malfunction' was the 'cause' of the adverse event. 'Human error' is frequently blamed and recommendations often focus on changing individual behaviours. [27] Importantly, performance is often compared to work-as-imagined rather than to work-asdone. Viewing actions objectively as grounded in a dense context is always difficult when something has already gone wrong. Compared with those directly involved in an incident, investigators always have full knowledge of the outcome but analysing events retrospectively can lead to influence from various biases. 'Hindsight' and 'fundamental attribution' biases are two of the most common in these circumstances and can reduce our ability to explore why decisions were made and the multiple interacting contributing factors that often combine unexpectedly to cause adverse events. [28] Some unwanted outcomes investigated through SEA/RCA may indeed be the result of omission or commission errors in following a set of simple tasks or steps [arguably this may be more likely where trainees display knowledge gaps or lack of experience]. But there is evidence that, in complex systems, accidents can and do occur when every component of a system functions perfectly as designed or originally intended, due to the way that goals and context change. [29] Consider this scenario: a patient is discharged from hospital and a blood pressure pill Ramipril is not included on the immediate discharge letter (IDL). As no reason for this is recorded, the GP thought that it had been omitted in error. She kept Ramipril on the repeat medication list and the patient continued to receive it in their blister pack.
How often do we make similar clinical decisions and how often does this usually 'go right'?
The GP made a mindful decision to work around the protocol due to previous experience of this type of lack of information from secondary care. Here, efficiency (making the decision to continue the medication) was preferred to the more thorough option (contacting secondary care colleagues to confirm whether it should be stopped). This decision is not best viewed as a 'violation' or 'deviation', but as someone aiming for safe, efficient care based on knowledge, experience and the limited resources (information and time) available to them. Querying every IDL where information is not fully specified (maximum compliance and thoroughness) would simply not be deemed appropriate in this system. When things go well we are often judged (and indeed judge ourselves) on our efficiency; but when they go wrong we are judged on our thoroughness. If the patient develops acute kidney injury and is readmitted, analysis of the event may suggest the GP should have discontinued the medication and clarified the situation with secondary care regardless of the fact that the actions of the GP represented normal, everyday work. Whilst Safety-II is by nature proactive, the implication for retroactive analysis of such events is first to try to understand-"why does this normally go right"? This necessitates understanding the variable conditions people are faced with and the workarounds, adaptations, adjustments and tradeoffs that make the system function adequately (work-as-done). This is quite a radical departure from the usual SEA process, which compares what the poor staff have done against protocol, evidence-based guidance, or policy expectations that are based on the ideal or perfect system (work-as-imagined).
A focus on work-as-done and how to support staff may be useful in the analysis of more emotionally charged events and may help move away from blame/error tendencies which can leave many subtle features unreported or unknown. Some actions that simply cannot be tolerated may of course be identified, but it may become clear that local decisions were valid and that the system is fit-for-purpose. Exploration of how to increase resilience (ways to cope and achieve success given difficult conditions) with trainees and within teams may help in dealing with future pressure and efficiency versus thoroughness decisions.
QI projects often attempt to standardise work practices and reduce variability of performance through the stressing of protocol adherence and the measurement of compliance. These can act as constraints on alternatives to ensure that work is carried out in a set way. It is hoped that when these tasks are performed reliably that quality and, therefore, safety improves.
[30] QI can be very successful but in complex systems increasing reliability of components will not necessarily increase safety. . [31, 32] Adherence to one protocol can be a) misaligned with some conditions faced and b) fail to address the many interacting reasons why outcomes may vary. [11] As systems evolve to cope with the work conditions faced, it is unlikely that rules can be produced which cover all eventualities.
Adding a particular set of constraints may not just reduce unwanted variability but may also restrict flexible working and performance adjustments that are essential for successful negotiation in a complex care system.
In one example known to us, a QI project that included administrative staff contacting patients to discuss changes in medication following hospital discharge initially resulted in several instances of poorer care. Previously, staff had tacit knowledge of which patients were likely to be confused about their medication and would often phone the pharmacy to inform them of changes. The new protocol mandated discussion with patients (and recording that this discussion had taken place). Contacting the pharmacy was consequently downgraded in importance; the time required to contact patients meant that staff felt they did not have time to make another telephone call to the pharmacy. Although the barriers put in place by the new protocol potentially improved care, for some it constrained normal everyday adjustments that were required for success. A Safety-II approach might have involved determining how success was achieved normally (work as done) prior to the implementation of change, focused not just on best practice but on the various adjustments and trade-offs made by healthcare workers to achieve success under the conditions they face, including where resources are limited. The flexibility offered by ad hoc calls to pharmacy (made on case-based judgements driven by experience and local expertise) could then be balanced against the benefits offered by a standard codified procedure which might impact upon the benefits accrued.
The implication is that protocols should prioritise managing variability rather than simply eliminating it: flexible ways of working that are beneficial can be encouraged (as long as people are mindful of risks and responsibilities) and those that are not can be reduced. This may sound difficult as we are not used to thinking in this manner and it requires that we accept that performance variability is essential and develop ways to monitor and manage it.
This requires a commitment to understanding work-as-done and the identification of resources and conditions that are essential for successful functioning. Training to consider the best way to achieve success when resources (such as time or equipment) are missing, perhaps through scenario or simulation training, may benefit teams in this regard. For example, staff may be able to act out and discuss together how they would deal with particular scenarios such as a confused patient or a medication change which the GP is not happy to accept.
As we cannot specify work sufficiently in all parts of our systems it is not possible to develop a checklist or audit criteria that, if consistently implemented, will ensure successful outcomes. Chosen metrics must do more than assess compliance with an evidence based protocol; there may be many paths to success. It may be more valid to consider how people (patients, carers, doctors, administrative staff and pharmacists) co-ordinate and connect to achieve success. Teams may identify metrics that reflect successful work in their local context, thus bringing work-as-done and work-as-imagined closer together. An example may be measuring whether patients were aware of changes to medication regimes and using this measure to learn which approaches work best for different individual patients and/or patient groups.
The RCGP curriculum suggests that patient safety lessons should be able to be applied 
An extension of prospective system analysis is the development of metrics to monitor performance and allow anticipation of problems, so called 'leading indicators'. [34] Performance indicators are often used in healthcare to measure performance and decide if care is safe or of a high quality. These are usually 'lagging' in that they show us how safe we have been in the past and not how safe we are today. Teams may be able to identify softer 'leading' indicators of where threats may lie and thus be able to plan for such conditions and develop a range of strategies to help maintain successful performance. An example may be that, if a GP has to perform medicines reconciliation for six patients following discharge, mistakes may be more likely. Additionally, if a patient has many medications on their immediate discharge letter, there may be more chance of error. Practices could develop systems to ensure adequate time is available or immediate discharge letters with many medications could be flagged or double checked to ensure safe and effective reconciliation.
Improving safety by reflecting on care and using QI methods, such as SEA, clinical audit, care bundles and PDSA, has been widely encouraged. Safety-II thinking suggests that, for QI approaches to be successful, an understanding of system complexity and a refocus on successful adaptations in context as opposed to simple compliance is required. Safety is an emergent property of a complex system (just like consciousness is an emergent property of the functioning of neurones within our brains). Top down implementation of protocols and guidelines may be problematic unless it considers the local context, maps how work will be done by frontline staff, and identifies the conditions necessary for success. Relationships between individuals, teams and other parts of systems are important, and involving these staff members in the implementation of change is essential. The exact functioning of every part of a system cannot be designed, but ways for staff to co-ordinate and develop safe working practices can be encouraged.
Resilience Engineering does not suggest that we abandon Safety-I methods. Safety-I has brought many improvements and the requirement to learn from failure is based on some sound principles. But perhaps the first step in realising the potential of Safety-II is to adapt our current investigative processes to a) consider also cases of success and b) be ambivalent (at least from the outset) as to whether more standardisation is required as the best way forward.
Methods have been developed to help teams adopt these elements of a systems approach to analysing problems and developing solutions. The prominence of Human promise. [38] For now, perhaps the first step in moving towards Safety-II is to commence investigations of adverse events by involving frontline workers in the analysis of work-asdone as part of everyday clinical work and why things usually go well. Exploring the workarounds and adjustments employed when demand and capacity do not match enables study of the difference between work-as-imagined and work-as-done. The result may be a move from focusing on individual behaviours and compliance/error models to the implementation of changes that acknowledge that a variety of responses may be required dependent on the conditions faced. We need to train new GPs to be able to consider various options; how they should respond in different conditions; to understand when to vary their actions and to consider the positive and negative consequences of such actions. Resilient systems often have several ways to achieve success and so can monitor performance, anticipate problems, respond and learn. Implementation of 'traditional' QI methods that aim to reduce variability could, at times, be counterproductive.
The current culture of performance targets may need to be challenged or adapted. Analysis of past performance is an important part in QI but may not be an indicator of current safety. 
When patients are discharged from hospital back to the community, the medication record held by the GP practice needs to be updated to reflect the changes to medication made in hospital and patients need to be aware of these changes. This system involves secondary care doctors and pharmacists completing an immediate discharge letter (IDL) that is then transferred to the practice. It involves administrative staff interacting with technology to process the IDL within the practice, a member of practice staff (often a GP) making the medication changes in the electronic record and a process to communicate these changes to pharmacies and to patients. This system may be influenced by external factors including secondary care wishes (for new medications or tests), hospital bed pressures (that may expedite patient discharge), patient or carer wishes (perhaps to receive medication in a monitored dosage system), requests from pharmacies or nursing homes for medication and requirements of other organisation (perhaps to audit the process). The system is 'open' to these agents and the boundaries are hard to define. Interaction with computer software (email and electronic GP and pharmacy health records) and between people is required -for example the GP may discuss the medication list with secondary care staff, the community pharmacist, the patient or carer and perhaps district nursing staff. This process may involve administrative staff initially contacting the various people and reporting back to the GP.
Conditions may change rapidly with clinical requirements, demand (number of IDLs), capacity (number of GPs available to perform medicines reconciliation) or with the systems used to communicate medication changes. If the system changed from the patient handing in a paper copy of the IDL to one where IDLs were emailed from secondary care to the practice, systems within would need to be changed. IDLs may be processed by different administrative staff. IDLs may arrive at a certain time of the day requiring staff to reschedule work and change the systems for completing other tasks. The practice may discover that transferring IDLs electronically works well and may alter other existing systems for handling secondary care communication. But unanticipated problems may arise such as difficulty viewing both the electronic record and electronic IDL simultaneously and slow computer connections to branch surgeries that make the process less efficient. Patients may still be given a paper copy of the IDL on discharge and mistakenly hand this in to GP reception. As IDLs from certain departments in secondary care may still arrive in paper form, the IDL may still be processed and thus double work.
Given the same input, outcomes can be amplified, damped or even quite unexpected. For example, an IDL may contain the instruction to take prednisolone 40mg once daily and it may not be clear if the medication is to continue. This could result in the drug being prescribed for one week while clarification is requested from secondary care. After one week, more prednisolone may be requested by the patient. This may be dealt with and given by a locum who might not be fully aware of the systems in the practice. If this continued, health problems due to prolonged high dose prednisolone may result. This outcome could be damped by actions of other components in the system -for example the patient or carer may be aware of the need to reduce and stop the medication or the pharmacist may query the second prescription. The risk could be amplified by absence, due to illness or changing shift pattern, of the secondary care contact. The co-prescription of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug for muscle pain by an out-of-hours doctor who was not aware of the patient's medication may increase the risks of further problems including of gastrointestinal bleeding.
Systems in practices often 'evolve'. One member of staff may be responsible for clarifying medication changes with secondary care but may have found that patients will often be aware of instructions and are easier to contact than secondary care staff. This workaround may eventually become known to all staff and become 'normal' practice that seems to be a safe and more efficient way of working but does not follow protocol. 

Living in an oxygen-rich world carries the potential risk of oxidative stress. Oxygen in the ground state is not directly a problem because it is relatively stable compared with its intermediates (peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), superoxide (O ÿ 2 ) and hydroxyl radicals (OH )). The relatively stable ground state of oxygen is a triplet state with two unpaired electrons with the same spin quantum number, each located in different antibonding (p*) orbitals. Oxygen can react by oxidizing another molecule, but, despite its high thermodynamic reactivity, its reactions are kinetically slow because of the spin restriction. Electron transfer reactions in the presence of oxygen can give rise to the production of the reactive intermediates, which themselves can produce different kinds of damage in the cell (Halliwell and Gutteridge, 1998) .
In addition, the very reactive singlet oxygen can be generated by an input of energy. In this state, the spin restriction is removed and therefore the oxidizing ability of the oxygen is greatly increased. Singlet oxygen is produced by light absorption by photosensitizers and, in plants, particularly by the chlorophylls and their precursors. On the one hand chlorophylls are needed for the use of light energy in photosynthesis, on the other hand, the same molecules carry the potential danger of being a singlet oxygen producer (photosensitizer).
1 O 2 has a short halftime of about 200 ns in cells (Gorman and Rodgers, 1992) , and reacts with target molecules in the immediate neighbourhood. The possible diffusion distance of 1 O 2 has been calculated to be up to 10 nm in a physiologically relevant situation (Sies and Menck, 1992) .
In the following, the reactions leading to the production of 1 O 2 in the antenna and reaction centres of the photosynthetic apparatus, the potential target molecules and the protection mechanism avoiding 1 O 2 production, are described (Fig. 1 ). In addition, the 'useful' role of 1 O 2 will be discussed, being not only a damaging species but also an element of signal transduction chains leading to the specific expression of stress-related genes.
Chlorophyll as the main light-absorbing pigment in the lightharvesting complex, the inner antenna, and also in the reaction centres, is very efficient in absorbing light and has the additional advantage that the excited states are long-lived enough (up to a few nanoseconds) to allow the conversion of the excitation energy into an electrochemical potential via charge separation. If the energy is not efficiently used, the spins of the electrons in the excited state can rephase and give rise to a lower energy excited state: the chlorophyll triplet state. The chlorophyll triplet state has an even longer lifetime (a few ls under O 2 -saturated conditions) and can react with 3 O 2 to produce the very reactive 1 O 2 if no efficient quenchers are around. Chl triplet states may be populated in principle either directly by intersystem crossing (changing of the spin) from a singlet excited chlorophyll, or by charge recombination reactions (reversal of the charge separation and electron transfer reactions) in the reaction centres.
1 O 2 formation is favoured under certain physiological conditions like exposure to high light intensities or drought, leading to closure of the stomata and low CO 2 concentrations in the chloroplasts. Under such conditions the plastoquinone pool can be in a very reduced state, forward electron transport is very limited, and recombination reactions in PSII can occur. The kinetically limiting step of the photosynthetic electron transport chain is thought to be the quinol oxidation in the Q o site of the cytochrome b 6 f complex.
Quenching of chl triplet states and photoinhibition of PSII 1 O 2 can react with proteins, pigments, and lipids and is thought to be the most important species responsible for light-induced loss of PSII activity, the degradation of the D1 protein (protein of the reaction centre of PSII) and for pigment bleaching (for reviews on photoinhibition, see Prasil et al., 1992; Aro et al., 1993) .
1 O 2 formation in vivo was measured in the leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana by the use of a fluorescent dye (Hideg et al., 2001; op den Camp et al., 2003) . Trebst and coworkers (Trebst et al., 2002) provided evidence that 1 O 2 is the important damaging species during photoinhibition (i.e. the light-induced loss of PSII activity and of the D1 protein) of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii cells.
The dangerous triplet state of chlorophylls, which is the origin of the observed 1 O 2 , can be quenched directly by carotenoids in close proximity. The edge-to-edge distance between the two molecules must be less than the van der Waals distance (3.6 Å ), i.e. the electron orbitals must have some overlap. In this spin exchange reaction, the triplet state of the carotenoid is formed which can either dissipate the excess energy directly as heat or by physical quenching via enhanced intersystem crossing with 3 O 2 (Edge and Truscott, 1999) . This possibility is given in the antenna system, but not in the reaction centre, although two b-carotene molecules are present in the PSII reaction centre (Telfer, 2002;  for the location of the carotenes in the reaction centre, see Kamiya and Shen, 2003; Ferreira et al., 2004) . In the reaction centre, the distance between the carotenes and the triplet chlorophyll is too large to allow a direct triplet quenching. The redox potential of the redox couple P 680 /P 680 + is very positive and a too close contact to the carotene would lead to the efficient oxidation of the carotene. Hence the primary function of these b-carotenes is probably the quenching of 1 O 2 produced via the triplet state of P 680 (Telfer, 2002) . The latter was generated by charge recombination in PSII of the primary pair, P 680 Pheo. (Trebst, 2003) . Trebst et al. (2002) showed that inhibition of tocopherol biosynthesis in Chlamydomonas resulted in a stimulation of light-induced loss of PSII activity and D1 protein degradation. This implies that tocopherol comes close to the site of 1 O 2 generation in the reaction centre of PSII. If 1 O 2 produced via chl triplet formation in the reaction centre is not quenched by carotenoids or tocopherol, it is very probable that it reacts with the D1 protein as a target molecule. The rapid turnover of the D1 protein occurs even at low light intensities (Keren et al., 1995) , indicating that there is always some 1 O 2 formation even under low or moderate illumination. Singlet-oxygen-generating chemicals produce the same specific fragments of the D1 protein as are found under the conditions of acceptor side photoinhibition (Okada et al., 1996) . The degradation of the D1 protein may be regarded as a physiological defence system to prevent uncontrolled damage of PSII. The controlled destruction of the D1 protein seems to be an attractive safety valve to detoxify 1 O 2 directly at the place of its generation (Trebst, 2003) . Damaged D1 protein is degraded and PSII is repaired efficiently by the assembly of newly synthesized D1 in the so-called D1 protein damage-repair cycle (for reviews see Prasil et al., 1992; Aro et al., 1993) .
With respect to photoinhibition studies, one has to differentiate between two experimental conditions chosen (Jegerschöld et al., 1990; Blubaugh et al., 1991) and is not related to 1 O 2 production .
Triplet chl formation by charge recombination in the reaction centre of PSII In the reaction centre of PSII, the first detectable radical pair formed after excitation by light is P 680 + Pheo ÿ , with P 680 being the primary electron donor and pheophytin the primary electron acceptor (for a recent review on PSII see Goussias et al., 2002 ; for the X-ray structure of PSII, see Zouni et al., 2001; Kamiya and Shen, 2003; Ferreira et al., 2004) . In isolated PSII reaction centres which lack Q A and a functional donor side, the primary charge pair P 680 + Pheo ÿ recombines and a high yield of P 680 triplet is formed (Durrant et al., 1990) . In the absence of oxygen, the lifetime of the triplet state is approximately 1 ms and shortens in the presence of O 2 to approximately 30 ls. This effect, and the decrease in the stability of the reaction centre and bleaching of chl, were considered to be indirect evidence for 1 O 2 formation (Durrant et al., 1990) . 1 O 2 formation was detected directly by its luminescence (Macpherson et al., 1993) and by EPR spin trapping (Hideg et al., 1994) .
In isolated functional reaction centres possessing a complete and fuctional donor and acceptor side, the next step of electron transfer after the formation of the primary radical pair (P 680 + Pheo ÿ ) leads to the reduction of the primary quinone acceptor Q A . Subsequently, P 680 + is reduced by electron donation from the redox active tyrosine Tyr Z , which itself obtains an electron from the water oxidizing complex. Forward electron transfer is much faster than charge recombination reactions. However, charge recombination reactions can occur when the forward electron transport cannot proceed. If the primary quinone acceptor stays reduced because of a block of the forward electron transport (the so-called closed state of the reaction centre), the yield of the primary charge separation is lowered. It has been proposed that the presence of the semiquinone anion Q A ÿ in closed PSII may raise the energy of the primary pair by an electrostatic interaction so that the driving force of the primary charge separation is decreased compared with open reaction centres (state of the centre with the oxidized quinone, Q A ) (van Gorkom, 1985; Schatz et al., 1988) . In the closed reaction centre, however, if primary charge separation occurs, it is followed by recombination of the charges. Charge recombination in the primary pair will produce either the singlet ground state of P 680 or the triplet state of P 680 . The triplet state in the reaction centre is not localized directly on P 680 , i.e. the chlorophyll thought to bear the positive charge, but delocalized to another monomeric chlorophyll which is tilted by 308 compared with P 680 (van Mieghem et al., 1991; Kamlowski et al., 1996) . In the presence of a large antenna (PSII in vivo), the yield of the primary pair formed in the presence of Q A ÿ will be low (van Mieghem et al., 1995) .
Under reducing conditions, i.e. in the presence of dithionite and light (van Mieghem et al., 1989) or anaerobiosis and light (Vass et al., 1992) , Q A becomes doubly reduced, thereby releasing the negative electrostatic effect on the energy of the primary pair, and a high yield of charge separation, recombination, and P 680 triplet formation is observed (van Mieghem et al., 1989) . The double reduction of Q A and the high yield of 3 P 680 formation in such centres have been suggested to have some relevance to photoinhibition (van Mieghem et al., 1989; Vass et al., 1992) . The occurrence of double reduced Q A , however, has never been shown to occur under physiologically relevant conditions.
At cryogenic temperatures (around 20 K), different from the situation at ambient temperature, the primary radical pair is formed with a high yield, irrespective of the redox state of Q A and the yield of the triplet state 3 P 680 is high both with Q A ÿ and Q A H 2 (van Mieghem et al., 1995) . The triplet decay is much faster with Q A ÿ than with Q A H 2 present. At room temperature, the yield of the primary pair is reduced in the presence of Q A ÿ , but nevertheless, a significant yield of the primary pair is found in core complexes of Synechococcus (about half of that found in reaction centres with double reduced Q A ) (Schlodder and Brettel, 1988; van Mieghem et al., 1995) . Significant amounts of singlet oxygen are produced in PSII with a large antenna under continuous illumination (Hideg et al., 1994; Fufezan et al., 2002) , and they are most likely linked to chl triplet formation by charge recombination of the primary pair in PSII and not to chl triplet formation in the antenna. The production of singlet oxygen via chl triplet formation by charge recombination reaction is shown by the following experiments: (i) the induction of photoinhibition by repetitive single turnover flashes and (ii) the effect of the mid-point potential of the redox couple Q A /Q A ÿ on the yield of singlet oxygen production.
If dark-adapted PSII is excited by one single turnover flash (a short saturating flash which leads to one charge separation event in the majority of reaction centres), the state S 2 Q B ÿ is formed, with S 2 being an oxidation state of the Mn cluster, the water oxidizing complex, and Q B , the secondary quinone acceptor. In the dark, the charges recombine via the formation of the primary radical. As already described above, charge recombination of the primary radical pair leads to the production of the singlet and the triplet state of P 680 . The chl triplet state can react with formation of 1 O 2 which will damage the reaction centre. This flash-induced charge recombination reaction was exploited to investigate the mechanism of photoinhibition under low light in vivo (Keren et al., 1995) and in vitro (Keren et al., 1997) . Keren and coworkers used a series of single turnover flashes, spaced with a dark interval of 32 s, and measured the degree of photoinactivation and loss of the D1 protein. The dark interval is long enough to allow charge recombination between the S 2 or S 3 state and Q B ÿ to occur (the half-time of S 2 Q B ÿ recombination is approximately 20 s; Rutherford and Inoue, 1984) . When they used groups of flashes with 0.1 s spacing between the flashes in one group (for example, two flashes with 0.1 s interval and then 32 s dark interval), they observed photoinhibition after an uneven number of flashes per group and no or little photoinhibition after illumination with an even number of flashes per group. An even number of flashes produced the state S 3 Q B H 2 which does not recombine, while after an uneven number of flashes, charge recombination between the S 2 or S 3 state and Q B ÿ occurs leading to singlet and triplet P 680 . This shows that an overall smaller number of flashes (less light absorption in total) can be more damaging than a greater number of flashes. This study was extended using Ca 2+ -depleted PSII preparations which were not active in water-splitting (Keren et al., 2000) . In Ca 2+ -depleted PSII, the Mn cluster is blocked in the S 3 state (for a review on Ca 2+ -depleted PSII see Debus, 1992) . In the single turnover flash experiments, the loss of PSII activity was measured and compared with active samples. No difference between groups of even and uneven numbers of flashes was seen in Ca 2+ -depleted material. Using an uneven number of flashes, the activity loss was much smaller than in active samples. The yield of primary charge separation was not significantly reduced in Ca 2+ -depleted PSII, even after several single turnover flashes (Keren et al., 2000) , implying that a difference in the charge recombination pathway must be responsible for this phenomenon.
Influence of the redox potential of the quinone acceptor on the yield of singlet oxygen formation
In Ca 2+ -and also in Mn-depleted PSII not only the watersplitting activity is inhibited but, in addition, the mid-point potential of the Q A /Q A ÿ redox couple is up-shifted by about 150 mV. In PSII with an active water-splitting complex, the mid-point potential of the Q A /Q A ÿ couple was found to be ÿ80 mV (Krieger and Weis, 1992; Krieger et al., 1995) . In centres with the high potential form of Q A (E m about +65 mV), forward electron flow from Q A to Q B is energetically disfavoured and electron transfer is therefore unlikely to occur (Fig. 2) Krieger et al., 1995; Andréasson et al., 1995) . It was proposed that, in such centres, the shift of the mid-point potential of Q A influences the pathway of charge recombination within the reaction centre of PSII. In active PSII, with Q A in its normal, low potential form, charge recombination between the acceptor and the donor side proceeds with a high probability via the formation of the primary pair (P 680 + Pheo ÿ ), resulting in the formation of singlet and triplet P 680 . In centres with the high potential form of Q A , the formation of the primary pair is not disfavoured (Keren et al., 2000) and charge recombination may occur via an alternative pathway which does not involve the formation of excited chlorophyll species ( Fig. 3 ; see also Johnson et al., 1995; Rutherford and Krieger-Liszkay, 2001 ). As already described above, the loss of PSII activity after excitation by an uneven number of flashes was about 30% less in Ca 2+ -depleted PSII than in active PSII. In addition, no singlet oxygen production could be measured by spin trapping EPR with TEMP under continuous illumination . This shows that the change of the mid-point potential of Q A is an important molecular switch for changing the charge recombination pathway within PSII. By changing the midpoint potential of Q A from low to high potential, the formation of singlet oxygen can be avoided. This regulation mechanism of PSII may be of physiological importance. PSII is assembled without the Mn cluster and with Q A in the high potential form . In the light, during the so-called photoactivation process, the Mn cluster is assembled and the midpoint potential of Q A is switched from high potential to the low potential form, which allows linear electron flow. In the state prior to complete assembly of the functional watersplitting complex, PSII is protected against photodamage induced by 1 O 2 formation. Under high light conditions, the change of the mid-point potential of Q A may also be involved in the pH-dependent control of PSII activity. In addition to the dissipation of excess energy by the formation of zeaxanthin in the antenna (for a review see Demming-Adams, 1990) , the activity of the electron transfer can be altered at the level of the reaction centre of PSII (reaction centre quenching). When, in excess light, the pH in the lumen decreases below a certain threshold value, up to one Ca 2+ per PSII can be released and the mid-point potential of Q A is thereby switched to the high potential form (Krieger and Weis, 1992) . This was demonstrated in thylakoid membranes, in which a proton gradient was maintained by ATP-hydrolysis in the dark, by measuring the chlorophyll fluorescence at the F o -level at different redox potentials as a measure for the reduction state of Q A (Krieger and Weis, 1993) .
It is still unclear how the activity state of the watersplitting complex at the donor side is connected to the midpoint potential of the quinone at the acceptor side of PSII. One possibility is that, upon the release of Ca 2+ , a structural change in a protein subunit of the reaction centre and especially at the Q A binding site occurs, which could be responsible for the observed change in the mid-point potential. It might also be possible that cytochrome b 559 mediates between the donor and acceptor sides. In inactive and non-photoactivated PSII, cytochrome b 559 is in the low potential form and changes upon the assembly of the Mn to the high potential form, characteristic for the active PSII (for review, see Stewart and Brudvig, 1998) . The change of the potential form of cytochrome b 559 was already observed before the process of photoactivation was fully completed (Mizusawa et al., 1997) .
The influence of different herbicides on the mid-point potentials of the primary quinone acceptor Q A (KriegerLiszkay and Rutherford, 1998) and single point mutations in D1 (Rappaport et al., 2002) or in D2 (Vavilin and Vermaas, 2000) can be used as a tool to investigate the charge recombination pathways in PSII. Binding of herbicides to the Q B binding site of the D1 protein inhibits linear electron flow and affects the degree of photoinactivation and lightinduced degradation of the D1 protein. In vitro, the urea herbicide DCMU and related herbicides have been reported to retard photodamage (Keren et al., 1995 (Keren et al., , 1997 Kirilovsky et al., 1994) and degradation of the D1 protein (Keren et al., 1995 (Keren et al., , 1997 Nakajima et al., 1996; Jansen et al., 1993; Zer and Ohad, 1995) . By contrast with DCMU, phenolic herbicides, which also bind to the Q B -binding site, have the opposite effect and stimulate the susceptibility of PSII to light (Pallett and Dodge, 1980; Nakajima et al., 1996) and the degradation of D1 (Jansen et al., 1993) . Binding of these herbicides to the Q B binding site influence the mid-point potential of Q A . Phenolic herbicides lower the mid-point potential by approximately 45 mV and DCMU raises it by about 50 mV (Krieger-Liszkay and Rutherford, 1998) . A smaller difference of 60 mV between the redox potential in the presence of bromoxynil and in the presence of DCMU was reported by Roberts et al. (2003) when estimated from the back reaction rate of S 2 Q A ÿ . The effect of the different types of herbicide on the mid-point potential of Q A was not only observed for the low potential form but also for the high potential form of Q A (Krieger-Liszkay and Rutherford, 1998) . The absolute change in the mid-point potential of Q A by these herbicides was much lower (650 mV) than the shift induced by inactivation of the water-splitting complex (Ca 2+ -or Mn-depletion), but it has, nevertheless, a big effect Fig. 3 . Schematic diagram of the free energy levels of the states involved in recombination of the P + Q A ÿ radical pair in PSII. The scheme shows the electron transfer reactions after illumination of a dark-adapted PSII. A series of radical pairs is formed, each with a slight loss of energy. The back reactions between these radical pairs require thermal activation and are thus thermodynamically disfavoured. It is assumed that the P 680 + Pheo ÿ radical pair formed by back reaction from P 680 + Q A ÿ is at a lower energy level than that formed initially from *P 680 presumably through some kind of relaxation process. When the P 680 + Pheo ÿ radical is formed by the back reaction from the long-lived P + Q A ÿ state, there is a high probability for the formation of a triplet state ) and the amount of 1 O 2 produced increases linearly with increasing light intensities. In bacterial reaction centres it has been shown that the free energy gap between the P + Q A ÿ radical pair and the P + BPheo ÿ radical pair has a major influence on the back reaction pathway (Gunner et al., 1982; Gopher et al., 1985; Woodbury et al., 1986; Shopes and Wraight, 1987) . When the gap is smaller than 400 meV, the back reaction via the primary pair (P + BPheo ÿ ) dominates, while under conditions where the gap is greater than this value, a direct recombination pathway dominates (P + Q A ÿ !PQ A ). This direct recombination pathway involves electron tunnelling reactions. Based on these observations made with the bacterial reaction centre a model was proposed (Fig. 3) showing the influence of the mid-point potential of Q A on the charge recombination pathway within PSII (KriegerLiszkay and Rutherford, 1998; Rutherford and KriegerLiszkay, 2001 ). It seems likely that the modulation of the mid-point potential of Q A by the state of the water-splitting complex and by the herbicides will influence the free energy gap between P 680 + Q A ÿ and P 680 + Pheo ÿ . With DCMU it is predicted that the increase in the mid-point potential should increase the free energy gap and thereby diminish the yield of back reaction via the P 680 + Pheo ÿ radical pair. By analogy to the bacterial reaction centre a direct recombination via P 680 + Q A ÿ may take place which does not result in the formation of excited singlet or triplet states of P 680 . This model may explain the lower production of 1 O 2 observed in the presence of DCMU in centres with low potential Q A (Fufezan et al., 2002) and the absence of 1 O 2 formation in PSII with high potential Q A .
On the other hand, the decreased mid-point potential of Q A induced by phenolic herbicides should make the energy gap between P 680 + Q A ÿ and P 680 + Pheo ÿ smaller and, therefore, the back reaction via the primary radical pair and the formation of P 680 triplet more likely. Rappaport et al. (2002) investigated the influence of the mid-point potential of the Pheo/Pheo ÿ redox couple on charge recombination between S 2 Q A ÿ and showed that the recombination rate is sensitive to the free energy gap between Pheo and Q A . They used mutants of Synechocystis, in which the mid-point potential of Pheo/Pheo ÿ was shifted by +33 mV or ÿ74 mV compared with the wild type. The mutant with the potential shift of +33 mV showed an increase in the recombination rate (P 680 + Q A ÿ ) by a factor of four (measured as the decay of fluorescence after a saturating flash), while lowering of the mid-point potential slowed down the recombination by the same factor. This demonstrates that charge recombination via the formation of the primary radical pair (P 680 + Pheo ÿ ) is a significant process in PSII reaction centres in which forward electron flow is blocked. In addition they demonstrated that the direct charge recombination pathway which does not involve the repopulation of the primary pair is significant in the mutant with the lowered mid-point potential of Pheo/ Pheo ÿ . In a different set of experiments, mutations in the CD loop of the D2 protein were made in Synechocystis (Vavilin and Vermaas, 2000) . These mutants show a temperature shift and a decrease in intensity in the thermoluminescence band originating from S 2 Q A ÿ recombination. This was interpreted as an increase of the proportion of the direct recombination pathway of the P 680 + Q A ÿ pair which does not lead to the formation of an excited chlorophyll.
Charge recombination and chl triplet formation in the reaction centre of PSI In PSI, under reducing conditions when the iron sulphur clusters are prereduced or when vitamin K1 is removed from the reaction centre, charge recombination reactions also occur leading to the triplet state of P 700 at room temperature (for a review see Brettel, 1997) . In PSI, the lifetime of the state 3 P 700 is about 6 ls and is not shortened by 3 O 2 , indicating that P 700 is screened from O 2 (Sétif et al., 1981) . (Suh et al., 2000) . It was shown by Suh et al. (2000) that the Fe-S cluster of the Rieske protein and not the cytochromes are responsible for the 1 O 2 production in the light. The extent to which 1 O 2 generated by the cytochrome b 6 f complex contributes to photoinhibition of PSII is unclear. The cytochrome b 6 f complex contains, in addition to the other cofactors, one chlorophyll with an unknown function. In principle, this chlorophyll could also be involved in 1 O 2 formation acting as a photosensitizer.
Chlorophyll triplet states and consecutive 1 centre, but also by intersystem crossing from a singlet excited chlorophyll in the antenna. In addition, excited states of chlorophyll precursors can lead to the formation of 1 O 2 . In isolated protein/pigment complexes, the rate of intersystem crossing is significant (Kramer and Mathis, 1980) and the formation of triplet chlorophylls in the antenna has been shown in vitro. These states can be distinguished by their spectroscopic characteristics from the triplet chlorophyll in the reaction centre and they do not depend on the redox potential of the medium (Santabarbara et al., 2002) . Two of these triplet states are probably generated in the core complex while the third one may be generated in the light-harvesting complex (Santabarbara et al., 2002) . Formation of 1 O 2 from isolated LHCII has been shown in vitro by spin trapping with TEMP (Rinalducci et al., 2004) . Singlet oxygen may also play a role in the degradation of light-harvesting proteins. The degradation of LHCII is much slower than the degradation of the D1 protein (Lindahl et al., 1995) , but modifications of the protein are already visible after a few hours of low intensity illumination (100 lmol quanta m ÿ2 s ÿ1 ) in the isolated complex (Zolla and Rinalducci, 2002) . Degradation of LHCII releases a large number of chl. Light-induced damage might occur from such chl which is energetically uncoupled from the antenna, and will give a high triplet chl and, therefore, possibly high 1 O 2 yield. However, experimental evidence for the production of 1 O 2 by triplet formation in the antenna and their involvement in the light-induced damage in PSII in vivo in mature leaves is still missing. In the antenna 3 chl will be efficiently quenched by nearby carotenoids, so that 3 chl, although formed with a higher probability than by charge recombination in the reaction centre, will rarely be a problem.
Production of triplet chlorophyll and 1 O 2 may play a role during the transition from etioplasts to chloroplasts. In greening material, disorganized chlorophyll may act as a photosensitizer (Marder et al., 1998) . Oxygen uptake by thylakoid membranes, isolated from greening material, was measured. Oxygen uptake was significantly quenched by b-carotene and a-tocopherol, indicating that production of singlet oxygen was measured by this method (Caspi et al., 2000) . Protochlorophyllide acts also as photosensitizer, as shown for the Arabidopsis mutant flu (op den Camp et al., 2003) . In this mutant, a protein is inactivated which plays a key role during the negative feedback control of chlorophyll biosynthesis. As a consequence, the mutant accumulates free protochlorophyllide in the dark. In this study, the production of 1 O 2 was shown in leaves by quenching of the fluorescent dye DanePy in vivo after a dark-light transition of the plants op den Camp et al., 2003) . It was also shown previously, by the use of herbicides which block the protoporphyrinogen oxidase, that protoporphyrin IX is a photodynamic pigment which produces high amounts of 1 O 2 in the light (Becerril and Duke, 1989) . 1 O 2 may also be produced by free chlorophyll and chlorophyll degradation products which may be produced during strong photoinhibition. If the light-induced damage exceeds the controlled D1 degradation and repair of PSII, further protein degradation of chl binding subunits may lead to the production of free chls, which are dangerous photosensitizers. These free chls may be bound by ELIP (Early Light Induced Proteins) proteins (Adamska, 1997) or by proteins like WSCP (Water Soluble Chlorophyll Protein) (Schmidt et al., 2003) . The binding of chl to the WSCP reduces the yield of 1 O 2 production by a yet unknown mechanism. This protein is an unusual chl-binding protein in the sense that it does not bind carotenoids, but, nevertheless, efficiently protects bound chl against photodegradation and reduces the yield of O 2 is produced peripherally at the membrane surface and can, therefore, react with compounds of the stroma. Under natural conditions, 1 O 2 will be produced within the reaction centre of PSII and will react with different target molecules than in this mutant. Fischer, however, using inhibitors of the photosynthetic electron transport, studied 1 O 2 formation in PSII and only found a significant up-regulation of the glutathione peroxidase homologous gene from Chlamydomonas (B Fischer, personal communication).
The question arises how an extremely short-lived molecule like 1 O 2 can give rise to a signal that can be transmitted to the nucleus to regulate gene expression. Some other reactive oxygen species like superoxide or peroxide have been shown to act directly as second messengers in the regulation of expression of the oxidative stress response genes such as gutathione peroxidases, glutathione-S-transferases, and ascorbate peroxidase (for reviews see Mullineaux et al., 2000; Vranová et al., 2002) . Because of the short lifetime of it oxidizes a component of a signal transduction chain directly. Instead reaction products originating either from the D1 protein degradation or products of chlorophyll degradation can be envisaged as signal molecules. It has been shown that chlorophyll precursors like Mg-protoporphyrin IX can act as a signalling molecule in a signalling pathway between the chloroplasts and the nucleus (Strand et al., 2003) . By analogy, one can also speculate that a chlorophyll degradation product such as pheophytin, chlorophyllide, or pheophorbide (for chl degradation, see Matile et al., 1999) may act as a signalling molecule. Such a molecule could be transported out of the chloroplast to the cytosol by an ABC protein where it mediates a signal to the nucleus to regulate the expression of genes. It has been shown that a functional ABC protein is required for the transport of protophorhyrin IX (Møller et al., 2001) . It was also shown that an ABC transporter in the tonoplast membrane can transport chlorophyll catabolites to the vacuole (Lu et al., 1998) , making it likely that such a transport mechanism is also present in the chloroplast envelope membrane.
Alternatively, lipid peroxides may function as signalling molecules because unsaturated fatty acids are the preferred targets of 1 O 2 . However, no increase in 1 O 2 -mediated nonenzymatic lipid peroxidation could be found in the flu mutant, which accumulates protochlorophyllide and shows a higher yield of 1 O 2 formation than wild-type plants (Op den Camp et al., 2003) . Linolenic acid was rapidely oxidized upon illumination of the flu mutant, but the oxidation patterns observed were indicative for enzymatic oxidation and not for non-enzymatic oxidation by 1 O 2 . In general, fatty acid-derived signals may be involved in signalling pathways connected with cell death and the expression of stress-related genes (Weber, 2002) .
T umor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a member of the TNF superfamily and has attracted attention not only for its strong antitumor activity in a wide range of cancer cell types but also for its minimal cytotoxity to most normal cells and tissues. 1 Although we and others have demonstrated that introduction of TRAIL to normal human hepatocytes induced massive cell death, 2, 3 we have also demonstrated that the human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter, the gene that is highly active in more than 85% of human cancers but inactive in most normal cells, can be used to target TRAIL-mediated apoptosis to cancer cells, thus reducing TRAIL's toxicity to normal hepatocytes. 2 In mice, targeted expression of the TRAIL or Bax gene by the hTERT promoter also elicited strong antitumor activity without obvious systemic toxicity, even after systemic administration. 2, 4 Nevertheless, resistance to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis induction in cancer cells remains a challenging issue for the successful application of TRAIL in gene therapy. Although many types of cancers are sensitive to TRAILinduced apoptosis, substantial numbers of cancer cells are resistant to TRAIL, especially some highly malignant tumors such as pancreatic cancer, 5 melanoma, 6 and neuroblastoma. 7 Moreover, we found that repeated application of TRAIL protein or TRAIL-expressing adenovectors to TRAIL-susceptible cancer cells results in selection and expansion of TRAIL-resistant cells, leading to acquired resistance. 8 Thus, characterizing the mechanisms of resistance to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis will not only provide insight regarding transduction of the death signal from membrane to nucleus, but will also be essential for designing strategies to overcome resistance to TRAIL for future clinical applications.
Although the detailed mechanisms underlying TRAIL-mediated apoptosis remain to be characterized, some important components and steps in the signaling pathways of this process have been elucidated. A growing body of evidence shows that resistance to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis can occur at different levels in these pathways. Here we summarize some possible mechanisms related to cellular resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
The interaction of TRAIL with its two death receptors DR4 (TRAIL-R1) and DR5 (TRAIL-R2) is the initial step in TRAIL-induced apoptosis. 9, 10 The binding of TRAIL leads to trimerization of the death receptors and activation of receptor-mediated death pathway (Fig 1) . The activated death receptors recruit and activate an adaptor protein called Fas-associated death domain (FADD) through interactions between the death domain (DD) on the death receptors and FADD. The death effector domain (DED) of FADD recruits and activates caspase-8, leading to the formation of the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC). In type I cells, the presence of activated caspase-8, a so-called initiator caspase, is sufficient to induce activation of one or more effector caspases (e.g., caspase-3 or -7), which then act on final death substrates in apoptosis. 7, 11 However, in type II cells, even a small amount of activated caspase-8, although not enough to activate the effector caspases, is sufficient to trigger a mitochondria-dependent apoptotic amplification loop by activating Bid, which induces the accumulation of Bax in mitochondria, the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria, the activation of caspase-9, caspase-3, and caspase-7, and finally, programmed cell death. [11] [12] [13] In addition to inducing apoptosis by caspase-8 recruitment through FADD, TRAIL binding to its receptors also leads to activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kB) (Fig 1) . TRAIL death receptors, like the TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1), 14 activate NF-kB through the TNFR1-associated death domain protein (TRADD). 15 Activated TRADD recruits the DD-containing protein RIP and TNF receptor-associated factor-2 (TRAF2), leading to activation of the NF-kB pathway; in contrast, dominant-negative TRADD can block the NFkB activation induced by TRAIL receptors. 15 In TNFR1 signaling, TRADD is believed to be upstream of FADD. However, in TRAIL signaling, TRADD may be mediated by FADD, because TRADD recruitment to the DISC is observed only in the presence of FADD. 16 
So far, five TRAIL receptors have been discovered: the two agonistic receptors DR4 9 and DR5 10 and the three antagonistic decoy receptors DcR1 (TRAIL-R3), 17 DcR2 (TRAIL-R4), 18 and osteoprotegerin. 19 Apart from their extracellular domains, which are capable of binding TRAIL, DR4 and DR5 contain intracellular DD that can trigger the apoptotic signal upon binding TRAIL. 1, 11 On the other hand, DcR1 and DcR2 cannot transmit the apoptotic signal, because they either lack or have a functionally truncated DD. 9, 10, 11, 17, 18 The third decoy receptor, osteoprotegerin, is a secreted TNF receptor family member that can be detected in circulation, suggesting that osteoprotegerin may be a soluble antagonist receptor for TRAIL. 19 More data are needed before the function of osteoprotegerin in the signal pathway of TRAIL-induced apoptosis can be elucidated. Overall, it seems that all of the decoy receptors can inhibit TRAILinduced apoptosis by competing with DR4 or DR5 for TRAIL binding. [17] [18] [19] In humans, the decoy receptors are widely expressed in various tissues. DcR1 mRNA has been detected in peripheral blood leukocytes, ovary, testis, prostate, thymus, spleen, liver, lung, placenta, heart, kidney, and bone marrow, 20, 21 whereas DcR2 mRNA expression has been found in all tissues tested, including peripheral blood leukocytes, ovary, prostate, thymus, spleen, colon, and small intestine. 18 Most of the human tissues tested also expressed the agonistic death receptors DR4 or DR5. 18, 20, 21 As all of the normal tissues that expressed decoy receptors and real death receptors at the same time were resistant to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, and because ectopic expression of DcR1 or DcR2 in some cancer cell lines reduced sensitivity to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, it is reasonable to postulate that DcR1 or DcR2 expression may protect human normal cells and tissues from TRAILinduced apoptosis. 18, 20, 21 However, no correlation has been found between decoy receptor expression and TRAIL resistance in any form of cancer studied thus far. In one study, the TRAIL-resistant melanoma cell line WM3211 expressed mRNA for DR5, but not for DcR1 and DcR2. 22 In contrast, three TRAIL-sensitive melanoma cell lines (WM9, WM793, and WM1205) expressed DcR1, DcR2 or both. 22 In another study, 7 only five of 18 neuroblastoma cell lines tested were sensitive to TRAIL, but all five of those cell lines expressed DcR1, DcR2, or both, at moderate to strong levels. These findings indicate Figure 1 The signaling pathway of TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Death signal from TRAIL receptors may transduce via activated caspase-8 directly by activating effector caspase-3, or indirectly by activating Bid, which in turn translocates into mitochondria and causes cytochrome c and Smac release to cytosol. The released cytochrome c interacts with Apaf-1 and causes caspase-9 activation, which then activates effector caspase-3. The released Smac inhibits IAPs by preventing their binding to capspase-9 and caspase-3. Death receptor apoptosis pathways induced by TRAIL can also activate NF-kB. Different subunit activation of NF-kB determines whether NF-kB favors apoptosis or survival.
indicates activation. B indicates inactivation.
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in cancer L Zhang and B Fang that, in cancer, some mechanisms other than protection by decoy receptors exist, which confer resistance to TRAIL.
DR4 and DR5, the two agonistic death receptors for TRAIL, are able to transmit apoptotic signals upon TRAIL binding. Theoretically, dysfunctions in either receptor could cause TRAIL resistance. The genes for both DR4 and DR5 have been mapped to chromosome 8p21-22, a segment noted in genome-wide searches to be one of the most common sites of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in several types of cancers. Thus, it is rational to hypothesize that one or more tumor suppressor genes are located in this region, and to explore the possibility of mutational inactivation of DR4 and DR5 in those forms of cancer. [23] [24] [25] A polymorphism in DR4 has been described in the human ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3 and the human bladder cancer cell line J82. 24 An A-to-G alteration at nucleotide 1322 of DR4 in both cell types results in substitution of an arginine for lysine at codon 441 (K441R) in the DD of DR4. About 20% of normal individuals also had the same base change. 24 Transfection of SW480 colon cancer cells with a vector expressing polymorphic DR4 showed that the polymorphic form was less effective in cell killing than its wild-type counterpart. 24 Another study by the same investigators 23 showed two missense nucleotide substitutions in DR4 in lung cancer, head and neck squamous cell cancer, and gastric adenocarcinoma cells. The first of these substitutions occurred at nucleotide 626 of DR4, where a C-to-G change results in substitution of an arginine for threonine at codon 209 (T209R). The other missense alteration occurred at nucleotide 422 of DR4, where a G-to-A change results in substitution of a histidine for arginine at codon 141 (R141H). Only 13% of a normal control group was homozygous for both the T209R and R141H changes, but 35% of non-small-cell lung cancer specimens, 47% of primary head and neck squamous cell cancer specimens, and 44% of gastric adenocarcinomas specimens were homozygous for both changes. These two amino-acid changes occurred in or near the ligandbinding domain of DR4, suggesting that these changes may cause abnormal death receptor trimerization or TRAIL binding. 23 In another study, 26 mutations in DR4 were identified in three of 34 specimens from breast cancers that had metastasized, but none were found in any of the 23 specimens of breast cancer that had not metastasized. All the three mutations were single-nucleotide substitutions, which resulted in missense mutations within the DD regions of DR4. Breast cancer that had metastasized also showed higher frequency of LOH than breast cancer that had not metastasized, suggesting that DR4 may act like a tumor suppressor gene in some breast cancer and but may lose this function during the progression into metastatic stages. Indeed, expression of mutated DR4 in 293 cells led to the suppression of apoptosis. 26 In one other report, 27 mutation screening in the DD region of DR4 revealed only two missense mutations among 117 samples of human non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (1.7%).
Mutations in the DR5 gene have been identified in head and neck cancer, non-small-cell lung cancer, breast cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma. A screening of 40 primary head and neck cancer specimens for mutations in DR5 revealed two such mutations, one of which was a 2-bp insertion in the DD of DR5 that resulted in a premature stop codon and a truncated DR5. 28 This insertion was also present in the germ line of the affected patient. Transfection of the truncated DR5 mutant into head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and colon and ovarian carcinoma cell lines led to a loss of growth-suppressive function. 28 In another study, 11 of 104 non-small-cell lung cancer specimens (10.6%) were found to have mutations in the DD of DR5, which could not be detected in the corresponding normal tissue samples. Of these 11 samples, seven were hemizygous without LOH. The authors postulated that hemizygously mutated DR5 may bind with other, normal DR5 proteins to form a structurally abnormal DR5 trimer, which could affect binding to adaptor proteins, such as FADD. 29 In the study of DR4 in breast cancer discussed in the previous paragraph, 26 four mutations in DR5 were identified among 34 breast cancer that had metastasized (11.8%), but no mutations in DR5 were found in any of 23 breast cancers that had not metastasized. In contrast to the DR4 mutations in that study, the two DR5 mutations were identified within the DD, and another two mutations were detected in the flanking region of the DD. Still, expression of these mutated DR5 in 293 cells led to suppression of apoptosis. 26 In other studies, one missense mutation was detected in the DD of DR5 among 100 samples of hepatocellular carcinoma (1%), 30 and six point mutations were detected in the coding regions of the DR5 gene among 117 samples of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (5.1%). 27 
Assembly of the DISC is an early molecular event in the signaling pathway of TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Several molecules, including TRAIL, TRAIL death receptors, FADD, caspase-8 or caspase-10, and cFLIP, participate in the formation of the DISC. Most components of the DISC are essential to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, and dysfunction in any of these DISC components can lead to TRAIL resistance. 7, 11 Evidence regarding the roles of FADD, caspase-8, and cFLIP in TRAIL-mediated apoptosis is reviewed below.
FADD is an adaptor molecule containing both DD and DED. Its essential role in death signal transduction was first identified in FasL-induced apoptosis. Through its interactions with activated Fas at the DD and caspase-8 at the DED, FADD transmits a death signal from Fas to caspase-8. 31 The involvement and importance of FADD in TRAIL signaling are highly controversial. Different 35 In one study using such cells, 36 the overexpression of DR4 by transient transfection into homozygously FADD-deficient (FADD À/À ) mouse embryonic fibroblasts induced apoptosis of those cells. The authors of that study concluded that FADD was not essential, as it was not required for DR4-and possibly DR5-mediated apoptosis. The use of transient transfection for the ectopic expression of death receptors, however, has raised concerns about nonspecific aggregation of the DD in death receptors. 35 In fact, evidence has already shown that overexpression of DR4 or DR5 by transient transfection into TRAIL-sensitive cell lines can lead to apoptosis independent of the TRAIL ligand. 20, 21, 35 However, in stably transfected cells or in physiological situations, expression of these receptors does not lead to cell death, and TRAIL binding to the death receptors is necessary to initiate apoptosis. 35 Specifically, FADDÀ/À embryonic fibroblasts stably transfected with mouse or human TRAIL death receptors were all resistant to TRAIL-induced cell death, but FADD þ /À fibroblasts stably transfected with mouse TRAIL death receptors, and FADD À/À fibroblasts in which FADD had been reconstituted with a retroviral construct, were all sensitive to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. 35 The conclusions from this study, that FADD is essential in TRAIL-induced apoptosis and that dysfunction of FADD can cause TRAIL resistance, are also supported by another study that used Jurkat cells. 37 In that study, FADD-deficient Jurkat cells were resistant to TRAIL even at very high concentrations (1 mg/mL), but wild-type Jurkat cells underwent extensive apoptosis at TRAIL concentrations as low as 10 ng/mL.
Convincing evidence is accumulating, which shows caspase-8 to be a key and irreplaceable molecule in TRAIL-induced as well as Fas L-and TNF-a-induced apoptosis. [37] [38] [39] [40] Downregulation or loss of caspase-8 expression can lead to TRAIL resistance. 6, 7 In the first line of evidence, caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells were shown to be completely resistant to TRAIL, whereas the corresponding wild-type cells remained sensitive to TRAIL. Second, the specific caspase-8 inhibitor Z-IETD-FMK could inhibit TRAIL-induced apoptosis in most TRAIL-sensitive cell lines. 38, 41 However, because Z-IETD-FMK may also inhibit other caspases, especially at high doses, use of a more specific approach such as small inhibitory RNA should be considered to confirm the specificity of caspase-8 inhibition. 42 Third, caspase-10, although structurally similar to caspase-8 and having a DED, is not a functional substitute for caspase-8.
Whether caspase-10 acts as an initiator caspase is controversial. Two groups that used the same mutant caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells both showed that caspase-10 does act as an initiator caspase in TRAIL deathreceptor signaling and that caspase-10 could replace caspase-8 function in the absence of caspase-8. 43, 44 However, a subsequent study by a third group using the same caspase-8-deficient cell line specifically indicated that caspase-10 does not initiate apoptosis. 39 Although TRAIL could induce cell death in the caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells, much higher concentrations of TRAIL ligand were needed to achieve the same degree of death induction when compared with caspase-8-expressing wild-type Jurkat cells. 39 Also, the two earlier studies used a transient caspase-10 expression system, which may have led to caspase-10 levels that were too high to be tolerated by the host cells. 43, 44 Moreover, some of the cells in the third study that expressed little or no caspase-10 showed no apparent defects in TRAIL-induced apoptosis. 39 The conclusion from the current data, therefore, is that caspase-8 has one or more unique functions that caspase-10 cannot replace for apoptosis initiation. A fourth line of evidence implicating caspase-8 is the observation that several types of cancer cells, including Ewing's tumor, neuroblastoma, malignant brain tumors, melanoma, and small-cell lung cancer, show resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis that correlates with downregulation or absence of caspase-8 expression. Importantly, restoration of caspase-8 expression in these resistant cells rendered them sensitive to TRAIL. 6, 7, [45] [46] [47] In a very few cases, loss of caspase-8 expression resulted from a gene deletion, as demonstrated by Southern blot analysis. In most cases, however, absence of caspase-8 expression resulted from gene silencing by DNA methylation in its promoter region. 6, 7, [45] [46] [47] Treatment of such cells with the demethylation agent 5-aza-2 0 -deoxycytidine reversed the hypermethylation of the caspase-8 promoter, thereby restoring expression of caspase-8 and sensitivity to TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
The apoptosis inhibitor cFLIP is structurally similar to caspase-8. 48 So far, only two forms of cFLIP have been detected, although multiple splicing variants may exist. cFLIP L contains two DEDs and a caspase-like domain, but it cannot activate caspase cascades because that domain lacks a cysteine residue essential for catalytic activity. cFLIP S also contains two DEDs, but it lacks almost the entire caspase-like domain. Both cFLIP L and cFLIP S can be recruited into the DISC, where they bind to either FADD or caspase-8 through DED-DED interactions, resulting in inhibition of caspase-8 activation and inhibition of subsequent apoptosis. 48 Initially, cFLIP was reported to have both proapoptotic [49] [50] [51] [52] and antiapoptotic effects; [53] [54] [55] [56] however, the proapoptotic effect was soon recognized to occur only in transient transfection systems, where excessive cFLIP expression could result in nonspecific cell death. 57 On the other hand, use of stable expression systems and cFLIP-deficient models TRAIL-induced apoptosis in cancer L Zhang and B Fang resulted in only the antiapoptotic effect being observed. 58, 59 Expression of cFLIP was recently reported to correlate strongly with malignant potential in colonic adenocarcinomas, melanoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma. [60] [61] [62] Changes in the cFLIP/caspase-8 ratio have also been reported to correlate with TRAIL resistance in several different tumors, including melanoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, Burkitt's lymphoma, and B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. 62, 63 Downregulation of cFLIP expression by using antisense RNA or siRNA may be a worthwhile strategy to explore for overcoming TRAIL resistance in types of cancer in which cFLIP overexpression is a key determinant of TRAIL resistance.
Despite findings that several types of malignant tumor express high levels of cFLIP and that overexpression of cFLIP can confer resistance to TRAIL and other death ligands, the physiological function of cFLIP remains unclear. However, it was recently postulated that cancer cells may acquire a certain degree of immune privilege by becoming resistant to death ligands such as TRAIL or FasL, and cFLIP may help in this process. 64 One group assessed the effect of cFLIP in tumorigenesis and immune escape by using stable cFLIP transfectants. In that system, inoculation of transfectants expressing little or no cFLIP into immunocompetent mice resulted in rejection of the transfectants in most mice, but inoculation of transfectants with high cFLIP expression into the same types of mice led to tumor development. In contrast, inoculation of either type of transfected cells into nude mice led to the formation of tumors that grew at the same rate regardless of cFLIP expression level. Thus, it seems that tumor cells that express little or no cFLIP can be eliminated to some extent through selective pressure by the immune system, but tumor cells that express high levels of cFLIP can escape immune surveillance. These findings suggest that immune therapy may be another useful approach for cancer therapy. 65 
During the process of TRAIL-induced apoptosis, activation of the initiator caspase-8 can transmit death signals either through direct activation of the effector caspase-3 or -7, or by means of the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bid, through a mitochondrial pathway. 11 In this mitochondrial death pathway, the ratio of expression of the proapoptotic Bax protein and the antiapoptotic Bcl-2 or Bcl-X L proteins ultimately determines cell death or survival. 12, 13 The importance of the mitochondrial pathway in TRAIL-induced apoptosis depends on the cell type. Evidence implicating Bcl-2, Bcl-X L , Bax, and Bak in the mitochondrial pathway of TRAIL-induced apoptosis is reviewed in the following paragraphs.
Overexpression of Bcl-X L or Bcl-2 can protect some types of cells against TRAIL-mediated apoptosis, suggesting that the mitochondrial pathway predominates in these types of cells. Bcl-X L expression correlated highly with sensitivity to TRAIL-induced apoptosis in three pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines. 5 The cell line Colo357, originally sensitive to TRAIL and expressing low levels of Bcl-X L , became resistant to TRAIL after Bcl-X L expression was restored by means of a retrovirus. Interestingly, Bcl-X L -overexpressing Colo357 cells, although resistant to TRAIL, had the same degree of caspase-8 cleavage as did the parental Colo357 cells, suggesting that caspase-8 activation was independent and upstream of the mitochondrial pathway. In another study, 66 overexpression of Bcl-2 conferred protection against TRAIL in neuroblastoma, glioblastoma, and breast cancer cell lines, but reduced TRAIL-induced caspase-8 cleavage, suggesting that caspase-8 was activated both upstream and downstream of the mitochondria in these cells upon treatment with TRAIL. As apoptosis induced by chemotherapy acts mainly through the mitochondrial pathway, 11 downregulation of Bcl-2 or Bcl-X L might restore sensitivity not only to chemotherapy but also to TRAIL in some types of cancer.
Mutational inactivation of the proapoptotic genes of Bax or Bak can render cancer cells resistant to apoptosis induced by TRAIL or chemotherapy. The importance of both molecules in apoptosis was demonstrated by the discovery that TRAIL could induce cytochrome c release and apoptosis in wild-type, Bax À/À or Bak À/À mouse embryonic fibroblasts, but not in double-knockout Bax À/À /Bak À/À cells. 67 These findings suggest that, functionally, Bax and Bak can substitute for each other in these cells, because knocking out only one of the two genes was not sufficient to confer resistance to TRAILinduced apoptosis. This does not seem to be the case for other types of cells, however. For example, the human colon cancer cell line HCT116, which expresses Bak, required Bax for TRAIL-induced apoptosis. 68 In that study, TRAIL produced rapid apoptosis in a single-alleleinactivated clone (Bax þ /À ) but not in a double-alleleinactivated clone (Bax À/À ). In another study, Bakdeficient Jurkat cells were more resistant than wild-type Jurkat cells to apoptosis induced by UV, staurosporin, VP-16, bleomycin, or cisplatin. Restoring the Bak gene restored cytochrome c release and the sensitivity of the Bak-deficient cells to VP-16. Recombinant Bak could also induce cytochrome c release from mitochondria purified from Bax À/À mice, suggesting that Bak plays an essential role, independent of Bax, in cytochrome c release and overcoming chemoresistance in Jurkat cells. 69 In conclusion, the importance of Bax, Bak or both in TRAIL-or chemotherapy drug-induced apoptosis seems to depend on the cell type.
Inhibitors of apoptosis (IAP) proteins, Smac/Diablo, and TRAIL resistance IAP proteins can block apoptotic events by inhibiting the catalytic activity of effector caspases (e.g., -3 and -7) or by TRAIL-induced apoptosis in cancer L Zhang and B Fang blocking the activation of the apopsomal caspase-9 by directly interacting with the active sites of these caspases. Each IAP contains one or three tandem repeats of an evolutionarily conserved domain termed baculovirus inhibitory repeat (BIR). Different BIRs are thought to have different preferences for distinct caspases. So far, six mammalian IAPs have been identified: cIAP1, cIAP2, Xlinked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP), neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP), survivin, and BIR repeatcontaining ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (BRUCE). XIAP is the most potent inhibitor of caspase activity. 70, 71 High expression of IAPs in cancer cells can confer resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
The activity of IAPs can be blocked by Smac/Diablo, a mitochondrial protein that is released into the cytosol at some point during the apoptotic cascade, where it promotes cell death by eliminating IAP inhibition of caspases. 74, 75 Smac/Diablo is thought to interact with the BIR regions on IAPs, thereby releasing the caspases and promoting apoptosis. Blocking the release of Smac/ Diablo from the mitochondria has been associated with resistance to TRAIL in some, but not all, melanoma cell lines. 76 In mitochondria-dependent type II cells, regulation of apoptosis by IAPs and Smac/Diablo is a major determinant of TRAIL sensitivity. TRAIL-resistant cancer cell lines, compared with TRAIL-sensitive cancer cell lines, show a reduced release of Smac/Diablo from the mitochondria to the cytosol. 72, 73, 76 However, overexpression of Smac/Diablo by transfection restored sensitivity to TRAIL in those cells, in addition to downregulating or cleaving XIAP, cIAP1, and cIAP2. 72, 73, 76 The release of Smac/Diablo from mitochondria, like cytochrome c, can be blocked by Bcl-2 overexpression. 76 NF-jB and TRAIL resistance NF-kB is a transcription factor that participates in the control of immune regulation, inflammatory responses, cell growth, and apoptosis. The five component subunits of NF-kB, cRel, cRelA/p65, cRelB, NF-kB1/p50, and NF-kB2/p52 form homodimeric or heterodimeric complexes and control transcription by binding NF-kB consensus sequences in the promoter regions of target genes. 77, 78 The effects of NF-kB on TRAIL signaling are controversial, with some reports showing that NF-kB activation protects cells from TRAIL-induced apoptosis 79, 80 and others showing the opposite effect that NF-kB promotes apoptosis. 81 These discrepancies, however, may reflect differences in the function and relative amounts of the NF-kB subunits. 82 Overexpression of the cRelA subunit, for example, inhibits caspase-8, DR4, and DR5 expression, and enhances IAP1 and IAP2 expression after TRAIL treatment. On the other hand, overexpression of cRel enhances DR4, DR5, and Bcl-X S expression and inhibits cIAP1 and IAP2 expression after TRAIL treatment. The relative amounts of cRel and cRelA in activated NF-kB molecules seem to determine whether the NF-kB favors apoptosis or survival. Thus, regulation of the expression of the different NF-kB subunits may be another new strategy for cancer therapy.
The MAP kinases are a superfamily of proteins that transmit signaling cascades from extracellular stimuli into cells; examples of MAP kinases include extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs), c-jun N-terminal protein kinases (JNKs), and p38 MAP kinases. Like NF-kB, MAP kinases participate in a wide variety of cellular processes, including immunoregulation, inflammation, cell growth, cell differentiation, and cell death. 83 Usually, activation of ERKs in response to death stimuli is believed to have an antiapoptotic effect. In support of this conclusion were findings that TRAIL induced rapid ERK1/2 activation in a group of melanoma cell lines, and the inhibition of that activation sensitized TRAIL-resistant melanoma cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, suggesting that ERK1/2 activation can itself protect against TRAIL-induced cell death in these TRAIL-resistant cell lines. 84 However, TRAIL also induced rapid ERK1/2 activation in TRAIL-sensitive melanoma cell lines, indicating that ERK1/2 activation by itself is not sufficient to protect against TRAIL-induced cell death in these TRAIL-sensitive cell lines. We hypothesize here that one or more anti-ERK cofactors exist in the TRAIL-sensitive melanoma cell lines but not in the TRAIL-resistant cell lines. On the other hand, ERK activation has also been reported to have proapoptotic effects. 85 In that study, sensitization of lung cancer cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by PG490, a candidate chemotherapeutic agent, seemed to require ERK2 activation in that the sensitization could be blocked by inhibiting ERK2 activation. 85 Studies of p38 MAP kinase and JNK activation in TRAIL-induced apoptosis have also produced inconsistent results. In one such report, 86 use of doxorubicin and cisplatin enhanced the apoptosis-inducing activity of antibodies to TRAIL receptors; this effect was assumed to result from activation of p38 MAP kinase and JNK, as inhibition of these kinases suppressed the apoptotic effect. In another study, 87 inhibition of JNK activation was shown to block apoptosis induced by a combination of the translation inhibitor anisomycin and TRAIL. JNK activation seems to be required for TRAIL-plus-anisomycin-induced apoptosis, but it is not sufficient because activation of JNK by its upstream activator MEKK2 did not sensitize cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Finally, we have noted p38 MAP kinase activation in colon cancer DLD1 cell line upon TRAIL treatment; however, inhibition of that activation was not related to development of TRAIL resistance in that cell line. 88 The functions of MAP kinases in TRAIL-induced apoptosis are further complicated by their involvement in cytokine secretion, particularly TNF-a, IL-1b, and IL-6. 89 
We hypothesize that TRAIL treatment involves different MAP kinases, different cell environments, and different cytokines, all of which interact to tip the balance in favor of cell survival or cell death.
Many approaches have been employed to overcome TRAIL resistance in cancer cells, notably by combination therapy of TRAIL with chemotherapy, or radiotherapy. However, a concern has been raised about the toxicity of such combination therapy on normal cells or tissues. 90 It is possible that methods used to sensitize TRAIL-resistant cancer cells can sensitize normal cells as well, leading to side effects. Therefore, elucidating the mechanisms of TRAIL resistance in normal cells or tissues is also an important step in TRAIL cancer therapy.
It is reported that expression of the decoy receptors is attributed to TRAIL resistance in normal human cells. 20, 21 However, accumulative data have already shown that the decoy receptor expression is not the only mechanism of TRAIL resistance of normal cells. For examples, DR5 receptor agonistic antibodies are capable of inducing apoptosis in DR5-expressed cancer cells, but not in normal human fibroblast cells and human hepatocytes. 91 Further studies show that the cancerous tissues express higher levels of DR5 mRNA and protein than do normal cells or tissues. As these DR5 receptor agonistic antibodies have high specificity for binding and activation of DR5 rather than other TRAIL receptors, such as DR4, DcR1, and DcR2, it is obvious that low expression of DR5 contributes to the resistance to the DR5 receptor agonistic antibodies. 91 Furthermore, when DR5 is upregulated by either MYC oncogene or doxorubicin, the normal cells can become sensitive to either the DR5 receptor agonistic antibodies or TRAIL. 24, 92 In most of the normal cells tested, DR4 shows much lower expression than that of DR5, which may also reduce TRAIL sensitivity. 91 In general, current data suggest that, in certain normal cells or tissues, the ratio of expression between real death receptor DR4 and DR5, and decoy receptors DcR1 and DcR2, may determine the TRAIL sensitivity. 20, 21, 24, 91, 92 Liver toxicity is a major concern for application of TRAIL gene therapy to human cancer patients. Although the human liver toxicity could be caused by special TRAIL protein preparation, such as tagged histidine or leucine, 93 the full length of TRAIL protein can readily induce liver toxicity. 2 However, the ratio of expression between death receptors DR4 and DR5, and decoy receptors DcR1 and DcR2, does not correlate with the sensitivity of hepatocytes to TRAIL, 94 suggesting that other molecules in the signaling pathway of TRAILinduced apoptosis may determine the fate of normal cells in response to TRAIL. In fact, in addition to the death receptors, overexpression of cFLIP and IAPs has also been reported to play a major role in protection of certain human normal cells, such as melanocytes and lung and foreskin fibroblasts, from TRAIL-induced apoptosis. 24, 95 However, no cFLIP and IAP expression knockdown experiments are performed in these reports. Therefore, much has to be done before we can completely picture the mechanisms of TRAIL resistance in normal human cells or tissues.
The concept of using recombinant TRAIL genes and proteins for cancer therapy has attracted much attention in anticancer research. Nevertheless, the potential for hepatotoxicity and the resistance of many tumor cells to TRAIL protein, recombinant or otherwise, has prevented this approach from entering clinical trials. Although TRAIL-mediated systemic toxicity might be prevented by targeted TRAIL gene therapy or other approaches, characterizing the mechanisms of resistance and developing strategies to overcome that resistance are still critical for future successes. Ongoing progress in molecular biology and cancer biology will certainly shed further light on TRAIL-mediated death signal transduction from the membrane to the nucleus, as well as the molecular events that stop this transduction. Although resistance to TRAIL in some cell types remains to be characterized, accumulating evidence suggests that combination therapy with TRAIL protein and chemotherapeutic drugs or radiation may overcome resistance to TRAIL. 96 The synergy can be achieved either through upregulating death receptors DR4 or DR5, caspase-3, caspase-8, or bax, or through downregulating Bcl-X L or cFLIP. This synergy leads to the expectation that the combination of TRAIL with chemotherapy and radiotherapy will play a major role in cancer therapy with TRAIL.
In this cohort of healthy middle-aged adults, fitness was significantly associated with a lower risk of developing chronic disease outcomes during 26 years of follow-up. These findings suggest that higher midlife fitness may be associated with the compression of morbidity in older age.
well studied, with multiple reports [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] describing an association of traditional cardiovascular risk factors, such as smoking and hypertension. Although physical activity (PA) likely represents an important determinant of healthy aging, studies [5] [6] [7] have reported inconsistent results; therefore, the incremental contribution of PA to healthy aging beyond other healthy lifestyle characteristics remains unclear. The inverse association between cardiorespiratory fitness (fitness) and mortality after adjustment for other risk factors is well established. [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] In addition, compared with selfreported measures of PA, fitness levels are more strongly associated with mortality, reflecting, at least in part, the objective nature of their measurement. 15 Therefore, we hypothesized that higher midlife fitness levels would be strongly associated with healthy aging as defined by a low burden of chronic condition (CC) outcomes. To test this hypothesis, we merged individual-level data from the Cooper Center Longitudinal Study (CCLS) with Medicare claims files from the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).

The study sample was derived from the CCLS, which is a large cohort of individuals who have completed a preventive medicine examination at the Cooper Clinic in Dallas, Texas, from 1970 to 2009. Patients seen at the Cooper Clinic are generally well-educated non-Hispanic whites from middle to upper socioeconomic strata. Patients who are part of the CCLS receive a comprehensive clinical examination that includes selfreported personal and family history, standardized medical examination by a physician, anthropometric measurements, fasting laboratory studies, and a maximal treadmill exercise test. Participants provide written informed consent for inclusion in the research database. The study was reviewed and approved annually by the institutional review board of The Cooper Institute.
Among 73 439 participants in the CCLS who had complete data for analysis, 24 809 became 65 years or older between January 1, 1999, and December 31, 2009, and were eligible to receive Medicare coverage. After excluding 2973 participants (12.0%) lacking traditional Medicare fee-for-service coverage (ie, Medicare Advantage participants lacking claims files), we excluded an additional 2559 participants (10.3%) with a selfreported history of myocardial infarction, stroke, cancer, chronic lung disease, or diabetes mellitus as defined by self-report or fasting blood glucose level of 126 mg/dL or higher (to convert to millimoles per liter, multiply by 0.0555) at study entry. An additional 607 individuals (2.4%) whose CCLS examination occurred after enrollment into a Medicare fee-for-service plan or were receiving early (younger than 65 years) eligibility coverage because of disability or renal dialysis were excluded, leaving a study sample of 18 670 (21.1% women) CCLS participants for the present analysis.
Fitness was assessed by maximal effort using the modified Balke protocol, as previously described. 17 The test time using this protocol correlates highly with directly measured maximal oxygen uptake (r=0.92). 18, 19 In accordance with standard approaches to the analysis of fitness data, 8, 9 each participant's treadmill time was classified into age-and sex-specific quintiles of fitness, with low fitness represented as quintile 1. Details of the treadmill times across fitness quintiles are reported by age and sex groups in eTable 1 (http://www.archinternmed.com). Using well-characterized regression equations, treadmill times from the Balke protocol also allow for estimation of fitness level in metabolic equivalents (METs). 18, 20 The measurement of other baseline variables in the CCLS has been well described. 8, 9, 21 Body mass index (calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared) was determined using a standard clinical scale and stadiometer. Seated resting blood pressure was obtained with a mercury sphygmomanometer. Venous blood obtained when the participants were fasting was assayed for serum cholesterol and glucose using standardized, automated techniques. Physical activity was measured using the Physical Activity Index, a 5-level PA questionnaire that has been reported 22, 23 (0, no regular PA; 1, some PA other than walking, running, or jogging; 2, walking, jogging, or running Ͻ16 km/wk; 3, walking, jogging, or running 16-32 km/wk; and 4, walking, jogging, or running Ͼ32 km/wk).
Medicare inpatient claims data were obtained from the CMS for surviving participants who were 65 years or older and were thus eligible for Medicare benefits from 1999 through 2009. The CMS data contain 100% of claims paid by Medicare for covered health care services. Chronic condition diagnoses used in this study were determined from the Chronic Condition Warehouse included in the Beneficiary Annual Summary File. 24 Chronic conditions are defined within the Chronic Condition Warehouse from well-established algorithms for research purposes. [24] [25] [26] A panel of 8 CCs was used for the present analysis: congestive heart failure, ischemic heart disease, stroke, diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic kidney disease, Alzheimer disease, and colon or lung cancer. These conditions were chosen from the Chronic Condition Warehouse in an effort to define a broad panel across multiple organ systems in accordance with definitions of healthy aging as defined by others. 2, 5, 6, 27 Minor conditions (ie, cataracts) and sex-specific outcomes (ie, breast or prostate cancer) were excluded to define a consistent set of conditions between men and women. To create a summary measure of the burden of CCs, the combined number was used as the outcome measure (eg, 0 CCs, 1 CC).
We determined the overall burden of CCs at ages 70, 75, 80, and 85 years by classifying all participants alive at these age thresholds according to the presence or absence of each of the 8 CCs. This required that the earliest indication of the condition occurred before or at the attained age among survivors. We calculated the incidence of CCs by dividing the number of diagnoses by the total observation time. Because patients could develop more than 1 CC during the surveillance period, a modified multivariate failure time model was used. 28, 29 Death during the surveillance period and survival to the end of the surveillance period were considered censoring events. We used attained age as the time scale, relegating all age effects to the baseline hazard characterizing each event stratum. Midlife fitness was entered as a continuous variable (in METs). Men and women were modeled separately. We accommodated possible departures from proportional hazards by testing for and retaining significant covariate by attained age effects. Main effects were estimated at the mean attained age.
To assess the association between fitness and (1) the development of a CC or (2) death, we conducted additional analyses among the subset of participants who died during the observation period, using a similar modeling approach. 28, 29 In this model, we treated death as an outcome of interest rather than a censoring event. This model therefore allowed transitions to death as well as to higher CC states. The estimates for the effect of fitness on the transition to (1) an additional CC or (2) death were compared using the Wald 2 statistic. This comparison takes the form of a ratio of relative risks in which each relative risk is for CCs relative to death, and the numerator is evaluated at 1-MET higher fitness than the denominator. We refer to this ratio as the morbidity compression ratio; values significantly less than 1 offer evidence of compression of morbidity. Finally, to compare descriptively the association between fitness and CC burden at the end of life, for each level of fitness we partitioned the remaining years of follow-up according to the time spent at each level of CC burden.
PϽ.05 (2-sided) was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed using commercial software (SAS for Windows, release 9.2; SAS Institute, Inc).
Baseline characteristics for 14 726 men and 3944 women in the study sample are reported in Table 1 , demonstrating low levels of traditional risk factors at study entry. As expected, fitness levels were higher in men compared with women, with higher levels of traditional risk factors in the lower fitness strata. After 120 780 personyears of Medicare follow-up, there was considerable variation in the prevalence of CC burden by attained age and across conditions ( Figure) .
The association between midlife fitness and the incidence of CCs is provided in Table 3 ). In men, higher blood pressure, higher total cholesterol, higher body mass index, higher glucose, and smoking prevalence were associated with a higher risk of developing CC outcomes (Table 3) . Overall, a comparable pattern of results was observed for women but with wider CIs.
When each of the 8 CCs was removed from the list of CCs in separate sensitivity analyses, the association between lower fitness and the risk of CC outcomes re- Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index (calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared); BP, blood pressure; CHD, coronary heart disease; IQR, interquartile range; METs, metabolic equivalents; Q, quintile. SI conversion factors: To convert cholesterol to millimoles per liter, multiply by 0.0259; glucose to millimoles per liter, multiply by 0.0555. a Q1 to Q5 represents age-and sex-specific quintiles of fitness based on Balke treadmill times, with Q1 being low fitness. Data are given as mean (SD) unless otherwise indicated.
b Physical Activity Index is a self-reported scale, for which 0 indicates no regular physical activity; 1, some physical activity other than walking, running, or jogging; 2, walking, jogging, or running less than 16 km/wk; 3, walking, jogging, or running 16 to 32 km/wk; and 4, walking, jogging, or running more than 32 km/wk. c Only 20% of participants reported educational level.
mained unchanged, suggesting that our findings are insensitive to any particular set of CCs (eTable 2). In an additional sensitivity analysis, when these data were stratified by the median age (49 years) at examination, we observed a similar pattern of results for fitness levels mea- Prevalence of selected chronic conditions in men and women by attained age (N = 18 670). Prevalence of chronic conditions at ages 70, 75, 80, and 85 years was determined by classifying all participants alive at these age thresholds according to the presence or absence of each of the 8 chronic conditions. The presence of a condition required that the earliest indication of the condition occurred before or at the attained age among survivors. Because some participants survived across multiple age thresholds and are represented in more than 1 age category, the numbers listed for the age groups total more than 18 670. ALZ indicates Alzheimer disease; CA, cancer of the colon or lung; CHF, congestive heart failure; CKD, chronic kidney disease; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; DM, diabetes mellitus; and IHD, ischemic heart disease. Abbreviations: CC, chronic condition; Q, quintile. a Rates per 100 person-years reported in age-and sex-specific quintiles of fitness based on Balke treadmill times, with Q1 being low fitness and Q5 being high fitness.
low-up in each fitness group before death. Among decedents with higher levels of midlife fitness, the morbidity compression ratio comparing CC development relative to that of death was significantly lower (0.90 [0.88-0.92] per MET). Thus, higher midlife fitness is associated with the delay in the development of CCs to a greater extent than the extension of the lifespan, suggesting the compression of morbidity nearer the end of life. The association of fitness with the compression of CC burden can also be seen in the proportion of time spent with different numbers of CCs before death. Compared with participants with lower midlife fitness, those with higher midlife fitness appeared to spend a greater proportion of their final 5 years of life with a lower burden of CCs ( Table 4) .
In the present study, higher fitness measured in midlife was strongly associated with a lower incidence of CCs decades later. Furthermore, higher midlife fitness was more strongly associated with a delay in the onset of CCs than with overall survival, suggesting that higher fitness in midlife is associated with the compression of morbidity in later life.
We observed clinically significant associations between midlife fitness levels and chronic disease burden in later life. At lower fitness levels, where the association was strongest (Table 2 ), our data suggest that a modest increase in fitness could translate into marked reduction of CCs in older age. For example, a 1-to 2-MET improvement in fitness resulting in promotion from the first to the second fitness quintile at age 50 years was associated with a 20% reduction in the incidence of CCs at ages 65 and older. Previous PA intervention studies [30] [31] [32] have achieved mean fitness gains of this magnitude using a 6-month program of 150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity exercise.
Studies have examined the association between risk factors in midlife and healthy aging, 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 27 demonstrating consistent associations between obesity, smoking, and hypertension and subsequent healthy aging decades later. However, the association between midlife PA patterns and healthy aging has been inconsistent. 1, 4, 6, 7, 15, 27, [33] [34] [35] To our knowledge, the association between midlife fitness and healthy aging has not been reported. In contrast to the more inconsistent associations with PA, we observed that higher midlife fitness was strongly and consistently associated with a lower rate of CC outcomes in later life in men and women. This discordance between PA and fitness is not unexpected given reports 15, 16, 35 demonstrating stronger associations between fitness and mortality compared with PA.
The inverse association between fitness and mortality has been well studied, [8] [9] [10] [12] [13] [14] 21 but less is known regarding the association between midlife fitness and CCs Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index (calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared); HR, hazard ratio; MET, metabolic equivalent; SBP, systolic blood pressure.
SI conversion factors: To convert cholesterol to millimoles per liter, multiply by 0.0259; glucose to millimoles per liter, multiply by 0.0555. a All models were adjusted for all covariates listed in the table as well as follow-up entry age, year of examination, and time-dependent interaction terms (see "Methods" section for details). 
In the present study, we combined Medicare administrative claims data with a large cohort of healthy men and women with objectively measured fitness levels, providing an efficient strategy to examine the association between midlife fitness and the development of a diverse set of CCs decades later. Our findings support the hypothesis that fitness in midlife is associated with a lower burden of chronic disease in later life.
In addition to reducing the burden of CCs, we also observed that higher midlife fitness was associated more strongly with the delay in the onset of CCs than with survival, suggesting that higher midlife fitness may promote the compression of morbidity in later life. [36] [37] [38] [39] Because of the strong correlation between morbidity and mortality, lifestyle patterns that equally delay the onset of both morbidity and mortality could result in more years of life lived with chronic disease. 40 In contrast, lifestyle characteristics that delay the onset of chronic disease to a greater extent than they prolong the lifespan could theoretically compress life-years lived with chronic disease and hence increase the years with improved quality of life and lower health care expenditures. 38, [40] [41] [42] [43] Our findings have important implications for public health and prevention practice by extending our knowledge of the health benefits of exercise in midlife.
Several studies [37] [38] [39] 44, 45 suggested the importance of physical exercise as a potential source of morbidity compression. However, most were relatively small with few overall deaths, limiting the ability to test for the presence of this phenomenon. In a cohort of middle-aged runners and control individuals monitored for 21 years (N = 961), runners were found to have less disability as assessed by the Health Assessment Questionnaire Disability Index, suggesting that regular physical exercise might delay the onset of disability. 46 However, the authors were not able to assess for the presence or absence of morbidity compression because of the overall small number of deaths in the study sample (n = 225). 46 In the present study, we included 18 670 participants with 2406 deaths, allowing a comparison of the associations between fitness, CCs, and mortality in the final 5 years of life.
Several limitations of this study should be noted. First, outcome data were derived from administrative data from the CMS rather than adjudicated clinical diagnoses. Nevertheless, Medicare data have been shown to be a reliable source of information across multiple clinical outcomes. 25, 26, [47] [48] [49] [50] [51] [52] Furthermore, Medicare data represent a unique and cost-effective resource, providing an opportunity to assess the association between midlife fitness levels and long-term chronic disease outcomes that would be prohibitively expensive, if not impossible, to replicate in a prospective cohort study of comparable size and duration.
Second, we linked individual-level data with Medicare claims files to compare the association between fitness and chronic disease outcomes at age 65 years or older. We were not able to capture outcomes that occurred between study entry and the onset of Medicare eligibility. For example, participants who died before achieving Medicare eligibility were not included in the present analysis. However, merging individual-level data with Medicare claims files has been used by other investigators in a parallel context, providing novel insight into the contribution of traditional risk factors and other Medicare outcomes. 2, [27] [28] [29] We observed a similar pattern of results for fitness levels measured in earlier life (ie, age Յ49 years) as well as in later life (ie, age Ͼ49 years) and closer to Medicare eligibility.
Third, we created an a priori panel of CCs across multiple organ systems and in accordance with definitions of healthy aging defined by others. [4] [5] [6] [7] 27, 53 Although this may have influenced our findings, we observed a similar pattern of results after multiple sensitivity analyses that sequentially excluded one of these CCs (eTable 2). Therefore, we believe that our findings are insensitive to the choice of CC panel and reflect a reasonable estimate of the association between midlife fitness and CC outcomes in older age.
Fourth, the CCLS is a unique cohort with a higher socioeconomic and educational status and a lower prevalence of traditional risk factors when compared with the general population. However, although the level of risk factors is lower than in the general population, prior work suggests that the effects are similar. 54 Finally, additional factors, such as life stress and dietary patterns, were not included in our analyses because these data are limited in the CCLS. Additional covariates could alter the observed associations of CCs and fitness. Follow-up data on fitness and PA are not uniformly available in the CCLS; therefore, we are not able to estimate the effect of changes in fitness with chronic disease burden in older age. However, our primary purpose was to determine the contribution of a single measure of midlife fitness with surrogates for healthy aging decades later. Furthermore, although fitness measures more proximate to the outcome would be of interest, it would also raise concerns regarding the possibility of reverse causation, in which low fitness reflected undiagnosed chronic disease burden. The healthy nature of our cohort and the long duration of follow-up make the presence of undiagnosed CCs at study entry unlikely and further support the hypothesis that greater midlife exercise is associated with a lower burden of chronic disease across the life span.
In summary, midlife fitness was associated with a lower risk of common chronic health conditions in men and women older than 65 years enrolled in Medicare. The finding that higher fitness was more strongly associated with CCs than with overall survival suggests that higher midlife fitness may be associated with the compression of morbidity in older age. rity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. Dr Berry had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. All authors have read and agree to the manuscript as written. (3) nonprofit research institute and provided internal funding for this study. Dr Berry receives funding from the Dedman Family Scholar in Clinical Care endowment at The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; grant K23 HL092229 from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; and grant 10BG1A4280091 from the American Heart Association. Role of the Sponsors: The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; and the American Heart Association made no contribution to the design of the study. In addition, the sponsors made no contribution to the collection, management, analysis, or interpretation of the data, or preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript. 
Incidence of falls escalates with age, events exacerbated by declines in muscle mass, strength, coordination and balance [1, 2] . When considered in concert with age-related decline in bone quality and quantity [3] , this elevated risk of falling portends an increase in the incidence of injury, including fracture [4] . The increase in falls and concomitant injuries not only elevates rates of mortality, it poses significant economic and societal burdens to health care systems worldwide [5] .
Poor postural control is recognized as a major contributor to fall risk, and individuals may rely upon a range of balance strategies to remain upright [6, 7] . Stable posture is maintained by a complex, integrated feedback from the visual, proprioceptive, and vestibular systems, as well as coordinated control by the neuromuscular system [8] [9] [10] . A commonly available -and relatively simplemethod of assessing balance and instability is stabilogram analysis, which entails recording the ground reaction vector, known as center of pressure (COP) [11] [12] [13] . Measures of stabilogram magnitude, peak and average sway velocities, and root-meansquare (RMS) amplitude, are used as predictors of fall-risk [14, 15] , while frequency domain characteristics have been proposed as an alternative way to express the results of COP measures to best capture postural control [16] .
With age, diseases such as glaucoma, diabetic neuropathy, and sarcopenia, as well as age-related declines in hearing, diminish the quality of the integrated sensory input systems critical to stability. Inevitably, fall risk is ultimately a complex amalgam of many different system inputs. Nevertheless, regardless of cause, identifying specific components of balance that contribute to elevated risk may help to target interventional strategies or environmental modifications to reduce the occurrence of falls.
The principal objective of this work was to determine if there were differences in parameters of balance between a young and elderly cohort -both with and without a self-reported history of falls -and use these data to develop an algorithm based on these retrospective data to potentially -and isolate those specific components of the posture measurements which help identify individuals at increased risk of falls. We hypothesized that 'elderly' subjects would be less stable than younger subjects, and that those elderly subjects with a history of falls would have a COP signature distinct from age-matched non-fallers. The comparison of COP measures in elderly fallers vs. non-fallers, and their relationship to the young healthy cohort was then used to iteratively develop a fall predictor algorithm. It is hoped that data such as these may ultimately provide simple, relatively accessible diagnostic infor-W mation from balance to prospectively identify those individuals at greatest risk of falls.

Study protocols and participation consents were reviewed and approved by the institutional human subjects review boards (IRBs) at each participating institution, including Hebrew SeniorLife (Harvard Medical School), National Aeronautics and Space Administration, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, and Stony Brook University. After obtaining written informed consent from each volunteer in the trial, participants underwent a screening for eligibility including medical history, medication review, and a dual energy x-ray absorptiometry scan (n.b., signed consent were collected for the ''young'' cohort by University of Texas Medical Branch and National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and for the ''elderly'' volunteers by Hebrew SeniorLife and Harvard Medical School). Those with osteoporosis (T-scores of ,22.5) were excluded from participation.
Postural control (balance) COP data were collected from 37 healthy young adults (23 males & 14 females), as well as 161 elderly subjects (52 males & 109 females) [17, 18] . The young cohort was recruited from the Houston area (part of a NASAfunded study on chronic bed rest), and the elderly cohort was recruited from the Boston area (part of an NIH-funded study on osteopenia in an aged population). As a principal goal of the NASA study was to determine if chronic bed rest potentiated poor balance, those with a self-reported history of falls were excluded from the study [15] . At baseline evaluation, elderly subjects that had fallen in the prior six-months were identified by questionnaire, in which a fall was defined as an event in which part of the body above the ankle touched the ground, including a fall on the stairs. Each member of the elderly group had to be at least 60 years of age, have a BMI below 30, have no prior history of pharmacologic treatment for osteoporosis, and have a dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) based T-score (number of standard deviations above or below the ''young'' normal average) of between 21.0 and 22.5, regardless of fall history [17] . Elderly subjects were healthy, free-living, cognitively intact residents of independent living communities in the Boston area [19] .
To assess postural control, each subject was instructed to stand in a relaxed manner on a force plate (Kistler 9286AA, Winterthur, Switzerland), with feet at shoulder width, hands at their sides, and eyes open (closed-eye tests were not permitted by the IRB panels). It was requested of each person to hold this 'relaxed stance' for a period of four minutes. To provide a visual cue during the test, a 2 cm-diameter blue spot was placed on a white wall at eye level, 2 meters from the subject, while other visual interference such as lab equipment was removed from the line of sight to reduce distractions. During data collection a member of the research group stood behind the subject to intervene in case of lost balance or a fall during testing, though no falls occurred during testing. COP measures were recorded by the force plate with an eight-channel amplifier, an analog-digital converter, and Bioware 3.2.6.104 software. Data were oversampled at 1000 Hz, and filtered with a second order Butterworth loss-pass filter at 50 Hz.
Data were analyzed using a custom MATLAB program (version 7.0.1, The MathWorks, Natick, Massachusetts) to calculate scalar parameters of COP magnitude and velocity, including maximal COP displacement from the centroid, root mean square (RMS) of COP displacement, maximal COP velocity, and RMS of COP velocity. Power spectral density calculations were performed to the total energy of the signal contained in the 0.2 to 1.0 Hz band which has been associated with the vestibular/somatosensory elements of postural control [20] . Finally, stabilogram diffusion analysis was performed to calculate the Short Term Diffusion Coefficient, a measure of the randomness of sway, the Long Term Scaling Exponent, a measure of the persistence of sway, and the critical displacement, a measure of the average displacement from the stabilogram's centroid which occurs before the postural control system switches from an open loop to a closed loop system [21] .
To assess fall risk, z-scores for the elderly participants with a history of a fall and for those with no history of falls were calculated. COP measures of sway in the elderly participants were normalized using the equation:
n {m s Z n = Normalized Z score for parameter n x n = raw value to be standardized from the elderly group m = mean of the sample (calculated from young normal adults) s = standard deviation of the sample (calculated from young normal adults)
To calculate the ''at risk'' threshold value for each COP parameter, the normalized Z-scores of the elderly faller and nonfaller groups were compared using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. The ROC analysis of the Z-score data to calculate cutoff thresholds ( Fig. 1) , and the value with the strongest specificity and sensitivity was then used as a cutoff, with any value above the threshold being labeled as ''at risk.'' The percentage of parameters tagged as ''at risk'' constituted the ''B-score'' of the subject, which was calculated by the following equations, with the B-score ranging from: 0; representing COP measures defined by the healthy young adult population, to 1; reflecting those at greatest risk of falls:
T n = Threshold value for parameter n calculated from ROC analysis, and
As the postural sway data in this study was non-parametric, the Kruskal-Wallis test was performed to compare multiple groups, and a Mann-Whitney test with post hoc comparisons adjusted for multiple testing using a Bonferroni correction to calculate between-pair significance. Statistical tests were performed using SPSS (version 14.0.0, SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL). As presented, all error bars indicate the standard deviation of the measure. P-values less than 0.05 were considered significant.
In order to use the information on prior falls in the prediction algorithm, elderly subjects were divided into two groups; those with a record of self-reported recent falls (n = 24; 14.9% of total elderly group) and those who had reported no falls in the prior sixmonth period (n = 137; 85.1% of total elderly group). Of the fallers, 9 were male (37.5%), while 43 of the non-fallers (31.3%) were male, indicating no tendency of males or females in this study sample to have a greater tendency to fall (p.0.05, x 2 = 0.35). However, there was not significant statistical power to determine the impact of gender on study outcomes.
When the ''fallers'' and ''non-fallers'' in the elderly cohort were considered in concert with the young healthy adults (n = 37), it yielded three groups of subjects for comparative analyses. The young adult group was significantly younger (34.9y67.1) and taller (1.72m60.09) than both elderly fallers (81.8y67.4; 1.64m60.14) and non-fallers (81.9y66.6; 1.62m60.10), with no significant difference in body weight (Table 1) . No significant differences were found between fallers and non-fallers with respect to height, weight, or age. Within each of the groups, neither age, height, weight, nor gender was found to have any association with any specific postural control measure or history of recent falls. Thus, there are no body habitus or gender criteria which appear to predispose any given individual to falls.
All participants completed the four-minute period of ''quiet stance'' on the force plate with no missing or out-of-range data. Stabilogram analysis revealed that, as compared to the young adults, several stability measures were significantly different in each of the elderly groups (Table 2 ; Fig. 2 ). While there were no significant differences between young and either elderly group in medio-lateral sway parameters, COP measures in the elderly revealed greater instability in multiple antero-posterior measures. For example, in the older group with recent falls, all measures except RMS displacement were significantly worse than in the young adults (e.g., maximal COP velocity was 2.76 greater in fallers than young adults; p,0.05). In comparisons between the two elderly groups, maximal displacement, diffusion coefficient, and scaling exponent were significantly worse in those with a history of fall (e.g., short term diffusion coefficient was 1.6 times greater in elderly fallers than elderly non-fallers).
As compared to young, healthy adults, the Z-scores of both elderly fallers and non-fallers were greater in measures of maximal and RMS displacement, maximal and RMS velocity, 0.2 to 1.0 Hz energy, short term diffusion coefficient, long term scaling exponent, and critical displacement (Table 3) . With the exception of the short term diffusion coefficient, elderly with a history of falls had a Z-score approximately twice that of the non-fallers (Fig. 3) . The B-score of elderly participants with a history of recent falls was found to be approximately two times greater than the B-score of elderly non-fallers (p,0.001; Fig. 4 ). ROC analysis of the B-score resulted in an idealized threshold value of 0.385, with a sensitivity of 70.8% and specificity of 73.7%.
Falls in older persons are a major cause of debilitating injuries, fractures and even death; yet identifying those at greatest risk of falls -allowing a focus on individuals deserving of greatest attention -has proven difficult. The goal of this study was to use simple, readily accessible postural sway characteristics of a young, healthy adult sample with no history of falls to characterize ''idealized'' balance, and then use those parameters to identify similarities and differences of these COP measures to those from two groups of older individuals, those with a history of recent falls and those without. This information was then used to iteratively develop an algorithm, weighted by those parameters within the ''falls'' group that were most different from the young healthy adults, to differentiate those at higher risk of falls.
Many factors contribute to falls beyond postural sway, and include hazards as diverse as weather (e.g., ice) and obstacles in the home (e.g., rugs, electric cords, pets and stairs). As importantly, many limitations of the protocol must be noted. That the results are based on retrospective analysis of falls, and have not been validated by 'predicting' those that fall, is another limitation that must be emphasized. Extrapolating from 'quiet stance' to the dynamic conditions that are more closely associated with falls is yet another limitation that must be recognized, not fully offset by the goal of collecting 'simple' COP measures from achievable conditions such as standing, rather than more sophisticated challenges such as perturbations of stance, or measures made while walking on a variety of surfaces. But with the robust differences in balance measures identified between the young, the elderly non-fallers, and the elderly fallers, we also believe that an algorithm such as that presented here, from data collected under repeatable conditions, may ultimately help identify those at greatest risk, and thus identify those for whom environmental, physical or pharmacologic interventions might best be targeted.
Not all measures of balance derived from the COP stabilogram measures were able to distinguish between the young and elderly groups, and thus were not considered critical predictive indices of fall risk and were excluded in the B-score calculation. Additionally, some measures, such as medio-lateral sway magnitude and velocity, which were greater in the elderly group than in the young adult group (p,0.05), showed no difference between the elderly fallers and non-fallers, and were also omitted from the Bscore calculation. Median power (p = 0.86) and the total energy of the COP signal contained in the 0 to 0.2 Hz (p = 0.07) and 1 to 5 Hz bands (p = 0.10), which have been associated with visual and proprioceptive/muscle control respectively [20] , showed no significant difference in fallers and non-fallers, and were also omitted from the algorithm. It is certainly possible that a larger sample size may have revealed a significant difference in mediolateral sway, and thus better justified its contribution to fall risk as identified by previous studies [22] . While power spectral density analysis identified differences between the young healthy adults and the elderly groups (both fallers and non-fallers) in median frequency and when compartmentalized into low, medium and high frequency ranges, the Z-score analysis could identify no differences between older participants with a history of falls and those with no falls, and thus was not included as an essential contributor in the B-score algorithm.
The use of ROC analysis of Z-score measures of sway allows for the prediction of fall risk as based on an iteratively defined threshold, such that subjects with a Z-score for a given parameter over the threshold would be tagged as being at greater risk for falls. However, analysis of the variance of sway parameters indicated Table 1 . Demographic Data of the young adult, elderly without a history of falls, and the elderly population with a self-reported incidence of falls which had occurred in the prior six months. Figure 2 . Stabilogram of a healthy young adult (A) and an elderly subject (B). The trace, collected over the four minute quiet-standing test period, represents movement of the center of pressure, in both the Medial-Lateral direction (side to side), and the Anterior-Posterior direction (front to back). Signs of poorer postural stability are evident in the aged subject, with a larger area of sway, as well as multiple excursions from center. As might be expected, with a longer path-length realized over the four-minute period in the elderly subject, peak sway velocities are also greater. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0070566.g002
that there was significant variation between subjects in terms of which sway parameters were above this threshold; one subject with a fall history may exceed the threshold for maximal displacement and velocity, while another may be over a threshold for RMS displacement, maximal velocity, and/or short term diffusion coefficient. This is most probably a reflection of the diverse range of factors which contribute to age-related declines in balance; an individual suffering from a compromise in vestibular feedback may exhibit different sway characteristics from a person suffering from mild neuropathy, while both may be at high fall risk [23] . Nevertheless, the greater the number of balance measures that were beyond a given threshold for a given parameter, the greater the likelihood that an individual was a member of the ''falls'' group. In fact, fallers exceeded the threshold in 5.17 out of 8 parameters, as compared to only 2.67 parameters in the non-faller group (p,0.001). Considering the range of factors which distinguish 'non-fallers' within the elderly cohort from those with a self-reported history of falls, we worked towards incorporating a multitude of COP parameters into formulating the fall algorithm, rather than relying on any single component, to improve our accuracy in identifying those individuals at greatest risk of falls. Because of the nature of such a metric, it is certainly possible to iteratively change the weighting of any given parameter, or to add additional parameters Table 2 . Postural Stability Measures of the young adult, elderly without a history of falls, and the elderly population with a selfreported incidence of falls which had occurred in the prior six months. 
Percent changes relative to the young adult are also given. The majority of postural stability measures significantly deteriorated from young adult to the elderly nonfaller group, and further eroded in the falls group. { p,0.05 from elderly (both groups); * p,0.05 from elderly fallers; # p,0.05 from young adult. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0070566.t002 to the calculation which were not measured in this study but may be related to fall risk, such as degree of neuropathy (monofilament score), visual acuity, or measures of mobility (sit-to-stand time). It would also be critical to consider parameters such as muscle strength and/or bone quantity and quality, to extend this falls-risk algorithm towards the formulation of a fracture-risk score, and could help account for those with low bone density who avoid fracture by avoiding falls vs. those with high bone density who are prone to fracture because of a tendency to fall.
The results of this study build upon the information gathered over the last two decades of fall-risk research. The ability to accurately predict fall risk with high specificity and sensitivity is still an ongoing topic, though the mechanisms of postural control have been well examined. Prospective studies showed a correlation between COP displacement and falls in the elderly, even in subjects without apparent balance issues [24] . And while quiet stance was examined here, it is important to emphasize that the use of perturbations have provided great insight into those at risk of falling, and future prospective trials which incorporate more sophisticated assessment of fall risk are certain to provide critical information on the reactive mechanics of stability and the effects of age-related degradation on individual balance strategies [25, 26] .Another limitation of this study is the dependence of self-reporting of falls, the key parameter used to stratify the elderly groups into those with recent fall history or those with a limited history of falls. Omissions in reporting are inevitable due to lapses of memory, or a given subject's reluctance to admit to a recent fall. Further, no consideration was given for the cause of fall (stumble, collapse, trip, slip, collision, etc.), nor was weighting of records enhanced for those with multiple falls over the six-month period. The elderly participants came from an ongoing trial of volunteers who fulfilled certain pre-specified inclusion and exclusion criteria [17] , and thus may not be readily generalized to other samples of aging populations (e.g., frail elderly, nursing home cohorts, etc.). Further, using a relatively small group as the normal for Z-score analysis (37 young adults with no history of falls) is not necessarily optimal, as a larger group might improve confidence in the calculation of ''idealized'' balance parameters.
The limitations of focusing on a simple COP measure made from quiet ''static'' stance cannot be overemphasized, particularly considering the numerous other factors beyond control of balance, per se, that contribute to risk of falling, including dynamic parameters of locomotion. Indeed, there is a significant and growing body of work that uses sophisticated measures of gait, dynamic balance and strength, at the very least, as much higherfidelity indices of fall risk [27] [28] [29] . It must be pointed out, however, that this study was designed specifically to approach COP as a relatively accessible and affordable assay and ideally enhance its ability to be used independently -or in conjunction with -more sophisticated measures of fall risk [23] . And certainly, it is entirely possible that those with a history of falls have already ''modified'' their balance control, and thus we are comparing stability measures from those with a ''fear of falling'' to those that have not yet fallen. Finally, it is important to emphasize that this algorithm has been iteratively ''optimized'' as driven by retrospective correlations to fall history, and has not been validated by prospectively predicting falls in the elderly subjects. Ultimately, validation of the B-score fall risk algorithm must be performed in a prospective study that can predict incident falls and can determine the accuracy of the prediction with both short and long-term follow-up [30] . Unfortunately, we are not able to address, here, the fidelity of self-reported falls, the nature of the falls that did occur, the differences that would arise in comparing fallers/non-fallers to more sophisticated measures of stability, or the inherent strategies that a young cohort may use to remain balanced as contrasted with an elderly population. These findings reflect the diagnostic potential of weighting specific components of postural stability to more accurately identify those with a history of falls, and suggest that balance measures from healthy young adults may serve as an idealized ''BScore'' referent to identify those at risk of falling, just as a bone density Z-or T-score may help identify those at greatest risk of fracture due to low quantity [17] . And just as a bone-density score is limited in identifying the source of low bone density (i.e., nutrition, genetics, activity-level, etc.), the B-score presented here is limited in that it does not identify the 'source' of deteriorating stability (i.e., neuromuscular, vestibular, visual, proprioception, etc). Recognizing the many limitations of this study, we do believe that efforts to prospectively validate a B-score based on some balance parameters may help to identify those at greatest risk of falling, and evaluate the efficacy of physical or pharmacologic interventions to directly diminish fall occurrence.
Certainly, postural control as measured during quiet stance must be quantified and combined with other risk factors for falls such as drug side effects, muscle weakness, visual acuity, temporary illness, locomotor instability and environmental factors (e.g., stairs, ice, rugs, pets). Future work could assess differential scaling of sway parameters, co-morbidity, and longitudinal analysis of additional falls, and determine how well fall risk correlates with fractures in the aged. Ultimately, by improving our ability to identify those at highest risk, it will be possible to focus targeted treatments and therapies, as well as prevention strategies and lifestyle modifications to reduce the incidence of injury causing falls.
transcriptional and metabolic changes that increase production and accumulation of the compatible solute glycerol. Mounting a rapid response to increased osmolarity is essential to yeast survival [3, 4] . Accordingly, S. cerevisiae can activate the HOG pathway within one minute of experiencing an osmotic shock [5] . Yeast can also effectively respond to rapid periodic oscillations (with frequencies up to 0.0046 Hz) between low and high external osmolyte concentrations [3] .
Despite its importance during periods of increased osmolarity, unintended activation of the HOG pathway during growth in normal osmolarity conditions is severely deleterious [6, 7] . The Sln1-Ypd1-Ssk1 three-component phospho-relay is responsible for maintaining inactivation of the HOG pathway under normal conditions. This three-component phospho-relay is a variant of the twocomponent signaling systems used by many prokaryotes for osmoregulation, chemotaxis, and other key cellular processes. Sln1 is active in vivo as a membrane-bound dimer [6] . Under normal osmolarity conditions, Sln1 autophosphorylates on a histidine residue and then irreversibly transfers the phosphate to an aspartate in its response regulator (RR) domain (Figure 2A ). Aspartatephosphorylated Sln1 binds to the histidine-containing phospho-transfer (HPt) protein Ypd1 and reversibly transfers its phosphate to Ypd1 ( Figure 2B ). Finally, phospho-Ypd1 transfers its phosphate to dimeric Ssk1, preventing it from interacting with Ssk2 (or the functionally redundant Ssk22) and inhibiting HOG pathway activity [5, 8, 9] . The sequence of phosphate transfers in the three-component relay is summarized in Figure 2A . In response to osmotic shock, the phospho-relay is inactivated, and Ssk1 is rapidly dephosphorylated through an as-yet unknown mechanism. Unphosphorylated Ssk1 then activates Ssk2 and Ssk22, leading to induction of the HOG pathway [1, 2] . It is thus the essential controller of HOG pathway activity, and variations in its concentration could compromise fitness.
There is limited existing experimental evidence that the phospho-relay is able to maintain robust phosphorylation of Ssk1 and inactivation of the HOG pathway despite changes in the levels of some pathway components [7, 9, 10] . We undertook a comprehensive characterization of the sensitivity of HOG pathway activation to changes in the expression levels of the phospho-relay proteins Sln1, Ypd1, and Ssk1. We systematically under-and overexpressed the three proteins using the GEV artificial induction system, which allows for rapid and nearly gratuitous induced expression of individual yeast genes [11] . We found that the phospho-relay maintains inactivation of the HOG pathway even after moderate perturbation of Sln1, Ypd1, and Ssk1.
We developed a detailed, biochemically realistic mathematical model of the HOG pathway three-component phospho-relay to elucidate the mechanism underlying this robustness ( Figure 2C ). Our model incorporates extensive structural and mechanistic information about the phospho-relay and considers nearly all possible interactions between the three relay proteins. We used massaction kinetics and algebraic calculations to characterize the steady-state behavior of the model. Steady-state algebraic models are a useful alternative to existing computational models of the HOG pathway for understanding robust behavior [3, 7, 12] . Unlike numerical simulations [3, 7, 12] , algebraic manipulations can be done without ever assigning specific values to the parameters (i.e., the rate constants in the reaction network), many of which are difficult or impossible to measure experimentally [13] . This advantage enabled us to design and analyze a more biochemically realistic model. A steady-state approximation Phospho-transfer proceeds from Sln1 (after autophosphorylation on H576 and transfer to D1144) to Ypd1 to Ssk1, as indicated by the numbers in circles. B Crystal structure of Ypd1 (green) in complex with the response regulator domain of Sln1 (Sln1-R1, red). Drawn from data presented in [18] . C Reaction network diagram describing our model of the phospho-relay. The network includes nearly all possible interactions between the three proteins subject to the biochemical assumptions outlined in the main text. For clarity, the reaction network is color-coded to indicate the groups of reactions involved in each phosphorylation event. S denotes Sln1, Y denotes Ypd1, and K denotes Ssk1. Phosphorylated residues are denoted by p, unphosphorylated residues by o. D Directed graph describing the subnetwork involving phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of Ssk1. The graph contains four loops that are connected as a branched tree.
is appropriate because previous studies have shown that activation of the HOG pathway does not vary under normal growth conditions [3, 4, 12, 14, 15] .
Our steady-state analysis predicted that relative levels of dephosphorylated Ssk1 depend solely on Ypd1 levels and that robustness is achieved by maintaining Ypd1 in large excess. We experimentally tested this prediction by perturbing protein expression levels so as to deplete this buffering pool of Ypd1. All such perturbations compromised the ability of the phospho-relay to inhibit the HOG pathway, leading to hyperactivation in normal osmolarity conditions. The presence of a large buffering pool of an intermediate phospho-relay component is a previously underappreciated mechanism for robustness and suggests a possible advantage of a three-component relay over a two-component system.

Inappropriate HOG pathway activation during normal osmolarity growth unnecessarily alters transcription and metabolism [7, 9, 10] . To assess the robustness of HOG pathway inhibition by the three-component phosphorelay, we created strains capable of overexpressing Sln1, Ypd1, and Ssk1 in response to β-estradiol. For these overexpression experiments, we used diploid strains homozygous for the GEV artificial transcription factor [11] . GEV consists of the Gal4 DNA-binding domain, the estrogen receptor, and the VP16 activation domain. Upon treatment with the hormone β-estradiol, GEV rapidly translocates to the nucleus, where it activates transcription from promoters containing the Gal4 DNA-binding target sequence. The GEV system enables rapid induction of individual yeast genes with limited off-target effects [11] . To make a given phospho-relay gene GEVinducible, we placed it under the control of the GAL1 promoter (SLN1/P GAL1 -SLN1, YPD1/P GAL1 -YPD1, and SSK1/P GAL1 -SSK1), as described previously [11] .
Inappropriate activation of the HOG pathway is known to cause a growth defect [7, 9, 10] . We therefore measured growth of these GEV strains after induction with β-estradiol at a range of concentrations to screen for HOG pathway hyperactivity. A strain carrying an inducible allele of Pbs2 (P GAL1 -PBS2/PBS2) was used as a control because Pbs2 overexpression is known to cause severe growth defects from inappropriate activation of the HOG pathway [7] . As shown in Figure 3A , strains overexpressing Pbs2 exhibited a measurable growth defect, while strains overexpressing components of the phospho-relay (Sln1, Ypd1, and Ssk1) showed no significant change.
We also assayed for Hog1 phosphorylation following GEV induction of phospho-relay components to obtain direct evidence that moderate overexpression does not cause HOG pathway hyperactivation. We used overexpression of Pbs2 and Ssk2 (also known to cause hyperactivation of the HOG pathway [7] ) as positive controls. After 30 minutes of GEV induction, there was no detectable increase in Hog1 phosphorylation in strains overexpressing phospho-relay components ( Figure 3B ). In contrast, Pbs2 and Ssk2 overexpression caused phosphorylation of Hog1. Interestingly, overexpression of the Ssk2 homolog Ssk22 had the strongest effect on Hog1 phosphorylation.
We then constructed diploid strains with a single inducible copy of the HOG phospho-relay gene of interest and a single P STL1 -YFP reporter to assay for HOG pathway transcriptional activity in response to overexpression of relay components. Stl1 is a glycerol/H + symporter whose expression is strongly upregulated in response to osmotic shock [16] . We overexpressed all three relay components, Pbs2, and Ssk22. Here we used Ssk22 as a control instead of Ssk2 because it showed a strong effect on Hog1 phosphorylation in the previous experiment. After 120 minutes of induction with 10 μM β-estradiol, Ssk22 and Pbs2 overexpression led to HOG-dependent transcription from the STL1 promoter, as indicated by an increase in YFP fluorescence ( Figure 4 ). Over the same period of time, overexpression of the phospho-relay components (Sln1, Ypd1, and Ssk1) caused almost no transcription from the STL1 promoter. After 19 hours, overexpression of Ssk1 and Sln1 did increase expression of YFP from the P STL1 -YFP reporter. These effects on longer time scales may have been due to factors beyond Ssk1 and Sln1 overexpression, however, as there was a population expressing YFP even in the control strain at 19 hours.
Growth, phosphorylation, and transcriptional measurements of HOG pathway activity all indicated that HOG pathway activation is robust to fluctuations in the Sln1-Ypd1-Ssk1 phospho-relay components. These results prompted us to investigate the mechanistic basis of this robustness using a biochemical model. The reaction network underlying our model ( Figure 2C ) has 37 nodes and involves 13 species. In this section we discuss the biochemical justification for key assumptions in the model.
There exist high-resolution crystal structures of Ypd1 alone and in complex with the Sln1 receiver domain ( Figure 2B ) [17, 18] . Genetic and biochemical evidence suggest that Sln1 forms an obligate homodimer and that Ypd1 can interact with either half of the dimer [6, 19] , which implies that formation of a Ypd1-Sln1(dimer)-Ypd1 ternary complex is possible. Accordingly, we include Sln1 in the reaction network as a dimer with four relevant phosphorylation sites. The Sln1 dimer is referred to as S H1D1H2D2 , where H1 and D1 denote the phosphorylatable histidine and aspartate residues in one half of the dimer and H2 and D2 denote the corresponding residues in the other half. The dimer is allowed to autophosphorylate on either histidine residue. Phospho-transfer from the histidine to the aspartate in the RR domain is treated as irreversible. A reverse reaction is included with all histidine autophosphorylation steps to account for possible hydrolysis of the phosphate prior to transfer [2, 20] . Each half of the dimer is assumed to be independent from the other. Coincident phosphorylation events (e.g., S OOOO forming S POPO in one step) are therefore considered to be unlikely and are excluded from the model. Following these assumptions, the model includes nine different forms of free Sln1 that are interconverted as shown in the reaction network.
In the second leg of the phospho-relay, any Sln1 phospho-form with at least one phosphorylated aspartate is allowed to reversibly associate with unphosphorylated monomeric Ypd1 (Y ) to form a series of binary complexes (YS OOOP , YS OPOO , YS POOP , YS OPPO , and YS OPOP ). Sln1-Ypd1 phospho-transfer has been shown to be reversible [21] . As such, all reactions that produce phospho-Ypd1 (Y P ) are treated as reversible. No
A Homozygous GEV diploid strains with a single inducible copy of a phospho-relay gene were grown to saturation in different concentrations of β-estradiol. The optical density (OD 600 ) after 13 hours of growth is plotted. Overexpression of Pbs2 caused a growth defect at higher concentrations of β-estradiol, while no significant growth defects were observed following overexpression of relay components (beyond the defect in the wild-type due to overexpression of Gal4 target genes) . Each point represents the mean and standard deviation over four replicates. B We assayed for Hog1 phosphorylation using an antibody specific to doubly phosphorylated Hog1 to confirm that moderate overexpression of phospho-relay components does not lead to activation of the HOG pathway. Overexpression of phospho-relay components using a saturating dose (10 μM) of β-estradiol did not lead to Hog1 phosphorylation. Overexpression of the positive controls Ssk22, Ssk2, and Pbs2, however, led to clear upregulation of Hog1 phosphorylation after 30 minutes of induction. Total Hog1 is shown as a loading control.
assumption is made about which half Ypd1 binds to in the YS OPOP binary complex because the halves of the Sln1 dimer are considered to be indistinguishable. Accordingly, the YS OPOP complex is allowed to form from either Y P + S OOOP or Y P + S OPOO . Additionally, YS OPOP can bind to a second Y molecule to form a ternary complex (YS OPOP Y ) that produces Y P using either of the Sln1 phospho-aspartate residues.
Phospho-Ypd1 then binds to and phosphorylates Ssk1, which is modeled as a dimer with two phosphorylation sites (K OO ) [9] . The two monophosphorylated forms of Ssk1, which are known to be fully inactive [9] , are assumed to be identical (i.e., K PO = K OP ). Y P can form a complex with K OO , leading to the production of K OP , and in turn Y P can bind to K OP and transfer a phosphate to produce K PP . The network includes one further interaction between Ypd1 and Ssk1 deduced from kinetic data. The half-life of phospho-Ssk1 in vitro has been measured to be dramatically different with and without the presence of Ypd1 (over 40 hours vs. 13 minutes, respectively), suggesting that Ypd1 binds to K OP and K PP to prevent hydrolysis of the phosphate [20, 22] . Accordingly, the reaction network includes the reversible formation of dead-end complexes between Ypd1 and phospho-Ssk1. Finally, unstabilized K PP and K OP are allowed to lose phosphates via spontaneous hydrolysis. Inclusion of these hydrolysis reactions ensures that there is a complete cycle for Ssk1 modification/demodification and that the system can reach a stable steady state. We emphasize, however, that spontaneous hydrolysis of complexed Ssk1 is likely not the mechanism for rapid dephosphorylation of large quantities of Ssk1 in response to osmotic shock. The mechanism for this rapid activation remains unknown but is irrelevant for our model, which is restricted to yeast growing in steady-state normal osmolarity conditions.
Robust inactivation of the HOG pathway requires that only a small fraction of total Ssk1 (K T ) be in the active (K OO ) modification form at steady state. The goal of this section is to derive a simple steady-state expression (an invariant) for the ratio of active to total Ssk1. We find an invariant of the form
where the coefficients are combinations of the rate constants. In this section we derive Eq. 1, and in the following section we discuss experimental tests of its predictions. The subnetwork involving Ssk1 contains four loops, which are linked in a branched tree ( Figure 2D ). It is a general feature of such networks that, at steady state, each individual loop is at steady state, irrespective of any other loops in which the components participate [23, 24] .
If each individual loop is at steady state, then the forward flux through each loop must be balanced by the backward flux, which yields the following four equations:
Because the intermediate complexes Y P K OO and Y P K OP are also at steady state, we can write
from which we deduce that
Substituting Eq. 3 into Eq. 2, we obtain expressions for K OP , K PP , YK OP , and YK PP in terms of K OO , Y , and Y P . From Eq. 3 we already have expressions for Y P K OO and Y P K OP in terms of K OO and Y P . As such, we are able to calculate the total amount of Ssk1 (K T ) in terms of just K OO , Y , and Y P . We have
Substituting for the individual terms, we obtain
The relative concentration of K OO is thus given by the invariant in Eq. 1.
The tree of loops structure of the Ssk1 network has an important consequence. It implies that the steady-state ratio of active to total Ssk1 is independent of the upstream biochemistry (i.e., the mechanistic details of the various Sln1 and Ypd1 reactions) as long as some process exists to generate positive levels of Y and Y P . In that case, the ratio will always be given by Eq. 1, although the numerical value will of course differ depending on steady-state concentrations of Y and Y P . The implications of this result, including its suggestion that robustness in the HOG pathway is independent of putative Sln1 bifunctionality, are considered in the conclusion.
The invariant derived from our mathematical model (Eq. 1) suggests that Ypd1 levels are critical to robustness. The denominator of the invariant is quadratic in the concentration of free Y P and linear in the concentration of free Y . Provided that the upstream network favors production of Y P over Y and that there is substantially more Ypd1 than Ssk1, the denominator of Eq. 1 will be large, and the relative concentration of K OO will be maintained at a low level. This situation allows for considerable underor overexpression of pathway components without spurious activation of the HOG pathway, in agreement with our experimental findings.
The invariant predicts that massive overexpression of Ypd1 should not cause phosphorylation of Hog1. In fact, additional Ypd1 would drive the [K OO ] K T ratio even closer to zero, lowering the amount of unphophorylated Ssk1 required for HOG pathway activation. In contrast, Ypd1 underexpression should increase the ratio, potentially compromising fitness due to inappropriate activation of the HOG pathway. Similarly, massive overexpression of Ssk1 should deplete free Y and Y P due to increased levels of the four intermediate complexes (Y P K OO , Y P K OP , YK OP , and YK PP ). Under the assumption of tight binding between Ypd1 and Ssk1 in each of these complexes, which is well-supported by existing kinetic data [20, 22] , very little free Ypd1 will be present at steady state if there is much more Ssk1 than Ypd1. As such, Eq. 1 predicts that the ratio will be higher following massive overexpression of Ssk1 than under wild-type conditions.
We experimentally validated these three predictions. The GEV system can achieve at most a 10-fold increase in protein expression from a single inducible allele [11] . We created haploid GEV yeast strains carrying high-copy 2μ plasmids with a GEV-inducible allele (P GAL1 -GENE) of a gene of interest, which allowed us to test the model prediction that massive overexpression of Ssk1, but not of Ypd1, should lead to inappropriate HOG pathway activation. These high-copy yeast plasmids are estimated to be present at 15-50 copies per cell [25] [26] [27] [28] .
We measured the growth of these strains in different concentrations of β-estradiol to assay for growth defects that might be due to HOG pathway hyperactivation. Massive overexpression of both Sln1 and Ssk1 caused a growth defect over a range of β-estradiol concentrations, but the strain with Ypd1 overexpressed grew as well as a wild-type strain carrying only the empty vector (P GAL1 2μ scURA3) ( Figure 5A ). Examination of growth over a finer range of β-estradiol concentrations indicated that overexpression of Ssk1 caused a more severe growth defect than overexpression of Sln1 ( Figure 5B ). These defects were also visible on solid media ( Figure 5C ). As such, extreme overexpression of Ssk1 compromises fitness.
We again assayed phospho-Hog1 levels to check if overexpression of Sln1 and Ssk1 causes activation of the HOG pathway in normal osmolarity conditions ( Figure 6 ). We measured Hog1 phosphorylation levels after GEVinduction of relay components and of the positive controls Pbs2 and Ssk22 from a multi-copy plasmid. Overexpression of Pbs2, Ssk22, and Ssk1 caused a significant change in Hog1 phosphorylation after 30 minutes ( Figure 6B ). Although some Hog1 phosphorylation was observed after overexpression of Sln1, the increase was insignificant. Interestingly, overexpression of Ypd1 did not cause an increase in the level of phosphorylated Hog1. In fact, levels of Hog1 phosphorylation were reduced in the Ypd1 overexpression strain (p = 0.0246, two-way ANOVA).
We could not perform underexpression experiments in a ypd1 background because deletion of Ypd1 is lethal. To underexpress Ypd1, we instead sporulated the diploid strain (P GAL1 -YPD1/YPD1) containing a wild-type copy of YPD1 and a single copy under the control of P GAL1 onto media containing 10 nM β-estradiol. We reasoned that 10 nM β-estradiol would give sufficient expression of Ypd1 for cell growth, which was confirmed by observation of four viable spores. We then grew these spores on media containing a range of β-estradiol concentrations (Figure 7) . Ypd1 underexpression caused a clear growth defect compared to the wild-type control on 0 nM and 5 nM β-estradiol, indicating that Ypd1 underexpression is toxic. In contrast, underexpression of Sln1 and Ssk1 did not cause a growth defect (Additional file 1: Figure S1 ).
As discussed above, we observed a slight but nonsignificant increase in Hog1 phosphorylation following massive overexpression of Sln1 ( Figure 6 ). We therefore investigated whether the growth defect in response to Sln1 overexpression is only partially due to HOG pathway activation by creating yeast strains null for SSK1. Activation of the HOG cascade through the Sln1 branch requires Ssk1, so in ssk1 strains it is not possible for Sln1 overexpression to activate the HOG pathway.
Overexpression of Sln1 from a 2μ plasmid using GEV was still detrimental to growth in the ssk1 strain (Figure 8) , indicating that the growth defect due to Sln1 overexpression is only partially due to HOG pathway activation. This result held both for growth in liquid cultures ( Figure 8A ) and on solid media ( Figure 8B ). It is consistent with Sln1 overexpression causing a smaller effect on Hog1 phosphorylation levels ( Figure 6 ).
Robustness of the Sln1-Ypd1-Ssk1 phospho-relay is essential to prevent spurious activation of the HOG pathway, which severely compromises yeast fitness. We established that the phospho-relay is robust to perturbations in the concentrations of the three relay components. A theoretical analysis suggested that a large pool of the intermediate component Ypd1 can buffer fluctuations in other pathway components to maintain robustness. This suggestion was consistent with earlier published measurements indicating that Ypd1 is at least 5 times more abundant than Ssk1 at normal expression levels [7, 29] . Although Ypd1 may also bind to the protein Skn7, combined levels of Ssk1 and Skn7 have been measured to be below total Ypd1 levels [29] . Our subsequent experiments confirmed that depletion of this buffering pool of Ypd1 leads to inappropriate activation of the HOG pathway.
The differential expression of Ypd1 and Ssk1 enables phosphorylation of excess Ssk1 and stabilization of the new phospho-Ssk1, buffering HOG pathway activation to fluctuations in Ssk1 levels. This novel mechanism of robustness suggests an advantage of a three-component Figure 5 Massive overexpression of phospho-relay components leads to growth defects. A Haploid GEV strains carrying a high-copy plasmid with an inducible HOG pathway gene were grown in different concentrations of β-estradiol. The OD 600 after 36 hours of growth is plotted as a function of β-estradiol concentration. Each point represents the mean and standard deviation of four replicates. Overexpression of Sln1 and Ssk1 (but not Ypd1) caused a growth defect. B The same strains were grown over a finer titration of β-estradiol concentrations. The OD 600 after 36 hours is plotted. At this resolution, it is clear that the growth defect from Ssk1 overexpression is more severe than the growth defect from Sln1 overexpression at low β-estradiol concentrations. C The same strains were frogged onto plates containing different concentrations of β-estradiol. Massive overexpression of Sln1 and Ssk1 again caused a growth defect comparable to that from overexpression of Pbs2. In all experiments, the parent strain carrying the empty vector plasmid [2μ P GAL1 scURA3] was used as a negative control.
architecture over a two-component one. In particular, the implementation of an analogous buffering strategy in a two-component system would be difficult because it would require expressing the sensor histidine kinase at very high levels. This situation might lead to imprecise sensing and various other off-target effects. In contrast, Figure 6 Growth defects following massive overexpression of phospho-relay components are due to activation of the HOG pathway. A We assayed for Hog1 phosphorylation after overexpression of relay components (Sln1, Ypd1, Ssk1) and positive controls (Pbs2, Ssk22). The parental strain carrying the empty plasmid vector was used as a negative control. B We quantified the amount of phosphorylated Hog1 (relative to Hog1) in five biological replicates of this experiment. Error bars represent the standard error. Pbs2, Ssk22, and Ssk1 caused a significant ( * ) change in Hog1 phosphorylation levels after overexpression for 30 minutes (p = 0.0395, 0.0096, and 0.0224, respectively; paired t-test). Hog1 phosphorylation levels were also significantly lower in the Ypd1 overexpression strain (p = 0.0246, two-way ANOVA).
the use of an intermediate transfer protein enables robust buffering with both the sensor and response regulator expressed at comparable levels. Our work has thus identified a potential mechanism for circumventing a tradeoff between efficient sensing and robust control. There are other possible advantages for a three-component architecture, including combinatorial control of response regulators by sensor proteins through a common phosphotransfer protein or segregation of sensing and activation functions between the nucleus and cytoplasm. Intriguingly, deletion of YPD1 has recently been shown to cause constitutive activation of the HOG pathway in Candida albicans, suggesting that its buffering capacity might also be important in this organism [30] .
Robustness in real biological systems is necessarily approximate and apt to be compromised at extreme expression levels of cellular components. In many systems, however, it has proven difficult to characterize where robustness breaks down and to reconcile such results with mathematical models, which often predict exact robustness [31] . Our combined theoretical and experimental results specify a single condition (Ypd1 in large excess) for robust regulation of the HOG pathway.
The link between bifunctionality and robustness is well-established [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] , and it is known that bifunctionality of EnvZ is essential to robustness in Escherichia coli osmoregulation [36, 37] . As such, it is intriguing that our model suggests that robustness in S. cerevisiae osmoregulation is not dependent on bifunctionality of Sln1. It is important to emphasize, however, that bifunctionality would not compromise robustness. Rather, the model indicates that any upstream process that produces non-zero levels of Y and Y P should enable the same fundamental behavior predicted by Eq. 1. The possibility that Sln1 exhibits phosphatase activity warrants further experimental investigation.

All yeast strains used in this study are listed in Additional file 2: Table S1 . The homozygous GEV diploid strain, which served as the wild-type background strain for all diploid overexpression experiments, was created by mating haploid GEV strains yMM598 and yMM1101 [11] and picking zygotes to create yMM1104. As described previously [11] , diploid yeast strains capable of overexpressing the desired HOG pathway protein from a single locus (yMM1263, yMM1272, yMM1259) were created by transforming [38] the homozygous GEV diploid strain yMM1104 with the KanMX-P GAL1 cassette amplified from yMM1100 genomic DNA using appropriate oligonucleotide pairs. Transformants were verified by colony PCR and sequencing.
Yeast strains containing 2μ plasmids for massive overexpression of pathway components (yMM1313-yMM1318) were constructed using recombination-mediated plasmid construction [39, 40] to generate the overexpression plasmids pMM330-pMM334 in vivo (as described below). Positive transformants were selected for and maintained on SC-Ura media [38] .
Yeast strains containing the P STL1 -YFP reporter of HOG pathway activity and one estradiol-inducible allele of a HOG pathway gene (yMM1296, yMM1298, yMM1300, yMM1301, yMM1304, yMM1305) were constructed by transforming the heterozygous diploid GEV yeast strains (yMM1104, yMM1272, yMM1264, yMM1259 yMM1286, yMM1287) already containing an inducible allele with the product of PCRing yECitrine-HphMX off plasmid pMM280 using appropriate oligonucleotides. The oligonucleotides contained homology such that the STL1 ORF was replaced with the yECitrine-HphMX cassette. Transformants were verified by colony PCR, and expression of YFP in 1M sorbitol was assayed.
Yeast strains null for the SSK1 gene (ssk1 ) were created by deleting the SSK1 ORF using appropriate oligonucleotide pairs to amplify KanMX from pMM131 and transforming it into yMM630. Transformants were selected for drug resistance and verified by colony PCR and sequencing.
Standard yeast media was used as noted. Low fluorescence yeast media was prepared as described previously [41] .
All plasmids used in this study are listed in Additional file 3: Table S2 . Plasmid pMM329 (P GAL1 scURA3 2μ) was constructed by PCR of the native GAL1 promoter from genomic DNA prepared from yMM1100 using appropriate primers. This promoter was ligated in pMM12 between the restriction sites KpnI and XhoI (scURA3 2μ) [42] . The resulting plasmid served as a template to create a series of overexpression plasmids with different HOG pathway genes under the control of the GAL1 promoter using yeast recombination-mediated plasmid construction [39, 40] . Appropriate primer pairs were used to amplify Pbs2, Ssk22, Sln1, Ypd1, and Ssk1, respectively, from yMM1100 genomic DNA. These PCR products were then co-transformed with pMM329 linearized Figure 8 Growth defects following Sln1 overexpression are not completely due to HOG pathway activation. A We assayed growth in wild-type and ssk1 strains overexpressing Sln1 in response to β-estradiol or carrying an empty P GAL1 vector control. Deletion of Ssk1, which prevented HOG pathway activation by Sln1, partially alleviated the growth defect due to Sln1 overexpression. B Growth of cells on plates containing 10 μM β-estradiol indicated that ssk1 reduced the toxicity of Sln1 overexpression.
with XhoI and SalI. The primer pairs used to amplify the HOG pathway genes contained homology with the pMM329 backbone such that the gene of interest was integrated after P GAL1 to create a P GAL1 -HOGGENE plasmid (pMM330-pMM334). Positive transformants in which the plasmid had been repaired were selected for on SC-Ura media. Plasmids were purified from these transformants and verified by sequencing.
Yeast strains were grown overnight to saturation in appropriate media (YPD or SC-Ura media to maintain plasmids). These saturated cultures were serially diluted in 10-fold increments and frogged onto YPD or SC-URA plates containing 0 nM, 10 nM, 100 nM, 1 μM, or 10 μM β-estradiol (Tocris Biosciences). These plates were incubated at 30°C for two days before imaging.
Yeast strains were grown overnight to saturation in YPD or SC-Ura media. In the morning, each strain was diluted 1:2000 into 200 μL of the same media containing 0 nM, 100 nM, 1 μM, or 10 μM of β-estradiol in a well of a 96-well flat-bottom plate (Costar). Each strain/estradiol combination was run in four replicates on the same plate. Growth curves were generated using a Synergy H1 microplate reader (BioTek). Cells were grown at 30°C with continuous, double-orbital (555 cpm) shaking, and OD 600 was measured every 20 minutes. Growth rates were calculated from the growth curves using spline-fits determined with the R package grofit [43] . OD was plotted at the time points indicated in the figure legends.
Diploid GEV strains yMM1104 (control), yMM1259 (SLN1/KanMX-P GAL1 -SLN1), yMM1263 (SSK1/KanMX-P GAL1 -SSK1), yMM1264 (SSK1/KanMX-P GAL1 -SSK1), and yMM1272 (YPD1/KanMXrev-P GAL1 -YPD1) were sporulated in 1% potassium acetate for 3 days and dissected onto YPD plates containing 10 nM β-estradiol. Two spores from each tetrad contained the wild-type HOG pathway gene (Sln1, Ypd1, or Ssk1), while the other contained the same gene under the control of the GAL1 promoter (KanMX-P GAL1 -SSK1, KanMX-P GAL1 -SLN1, KanMX-P GAL1 -YPD1). After all spores had grown to a sufficient size, they were diluted into YPD and frogged onto YPD plates containing 0 nM, 5 nM, 10 nM, 100 nM, 1 μM, or 10 μM β-estradiol. Spores were allowed to grow at 30°C for 2 days prior to imaging.
We created diploid GEV strains that carried both an inducible HOG gene under the control of P GAL1 promoter and a HOG pathway transcriptional reporter (P STL1 -yEVenus) to assay for downstream transcriptional activation in response to overexpression of various HOG pathway proteins. Strains were grown with agitation in low fluorescence media at 30°C to mid-log (Klett 80), at which point 200 μl of cell culture was sampled for flow cytometry by adding it to 800 μl of cold PBS + 0.1% Tween 20 stored at 4°C. Each culture was induced by adding β-estradiol to a final concentration of 10 μM. Cultures were sampled for flow cytometry after induction with β-estradiol at T = 2 hours and T = 19 hours. Fluorescence was analyzed by flow cytometry on a BD LSRII Multi-Laser Analyzer with HTS (BD Biosciences).
We measured levels of phosphorylated Hog1 following both moderate and massive overexpression of pathway components. For the moderate overexpression experiments, diploid GEV yeast strains yMM1104, yMM1263, yMM1259, yMM1272, and yMM1287, which each contained one estradiol-inducible copy of a HOG pathway gene, were grown to mid-log (Klett 80) in YPD at 30°C with shaking. To assess the effect of massive overexpression of HOG pathway proteins, yeast strains containing the P GAL1 -HOGGENE scURA3 2μ overexpression plasmids (yMM1313-yMM1318) were grown in SC-Ura media to mid-log (Klett 80) at 30°C with shaking. For all strains, at T = 0 expression of the gene of interest was induced by addition of 10 μM β-estradiol (final concentration). At indicated timepoints, 1.5 ml of culture was sampled.
Protein was prepped from samples immediately after each time point. Each sample was centrifuged (1320 RPM) and the supernatant aspirated. The resulting cell pellet was resuspended in 100 μl of 1X sample buffer (Invitrogen) with β-mercaptoethanol (final concentration of 10%), protease inhibitor (Roche), and phosphatase inhibitor (Fisher Scientific). Samples were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes, vortexed for 2 minutes, and then rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -20°C.
Prior to western blotting, samples were thawed and centrifuged at 1320 RPM for 5 minutes. They were run on 4-10% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen) and transferred to PVDF membranes (Invitrogen) by electrophoresis at 13 V for 4 hours. Membranes were blocked for 1 hour at room temperature with agitation in 1X TBS, 0.1% Tween-20, and 5% milk. Membranes were then probed with primary antibody overnight at 4°C.
The following antibodies were used to detect phosphorylated Hog1, total Hog1, and actin, respectively: antiphospho-p38 MAPK rabbit monoclonal antibodies (Cell Signaling Technology #9215), anti-c-myc goat polyclonal antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-6815), and antiβ-actin antibody (Abcam ab8224). All primary antibodies were diluted 1:1000 in 1X TBS, 0.1% Tween-20, and 5% milk. Following incubation with the primary antibody, membranes were washed (4 × 5 minutes) with TBST (1X TBS, 1% Tween-20) and then incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with the appropriate secondary antibody conjugated to HRP (anti-rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling #7074, 1:5000 dilution), rabbit anti-goat IgG (Santa Cruz sc-2768, 1:5000 dilution), and anti-mouse IgG (Abcam ab97023, 1:20000 dilution), respectively). All secondary antibodies were diluted in 5% milk, 1X TBS, and 1% Tween-20. After incubation with the secondary antibody, membranes were washed 4 × 5 minutes with 5% milk, 1X TBS, and 1% Tween-20.
Western blots were quantified using chemiluminescence. Membranes were developed using the Pierce Supersignal Femto kit following the manufacturer's protocol. Chemiluminescence was quantified using HyBlot CL Autoradiography film. Developed film was scanned on a Epson Perfection 4490 Photo Scanner in transmission mode. Protein levels were quantified by densitometry using the Gel Analysis plug-in in ImageJ [44] .
Each membrane was probed for phospho-Hog1, betaactin, and total Hog1 (in that order). After the chemiluminescence assay but before re-blocking, the membrane was stripped by washing in stripping buffer (2 × 10 minutes), phosphate-buffered saline (2 × 10 minutes) and 1X TBS + 1% Tween-20 (2 × 5 minutes). Stripping buffer contained 15 g glycine, 1 g SDS, and 10 mL Tween 20 in 1 L ultrapure water, with the pH adjusted to 2.2 using concentrated HCl.
Techniques related to endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) are becoming more widely used in the field of gastrointestinal endoscopy [1] . Although such advances have allowed patients to receive minimally invasive treatments, they take longer to perform and, consequently, expose both patients and medical staff members (occupational exposure) to higher doses of radiation. There is no established radiation exposure threshold for patients, because exposure is permitted as long as the benefits of the examination or treatment outweigh the risks of exposure. In contrast, there are strict annual permissible doses for medical personnel, because they receive no benefit from radiation exposure. Reducing the radiation exposure of patients and medical personnel is an important issue [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] .
It is already known that scatter radiation with overheadtube fluoroscopic equipment is higher than that with undercouch-tube equipment. Lens injuries induced in nonoptimized interventional radiology laboratories have been reported [7] . However, overhead-tube equipment is still often used in endoscopic procedures. Equipment such as radiation protective clothing and eyewear is used to prevent exposure to scattered radiation from patients, which is the main source of occupational radiation exposure for health care providers. However, these types of protective equipment do not cover some parts of the body, and it is very important to protect the entire body. In an experimental and clinical study, Kurihara et al. found that using a protective lead shield mounted to the X-ray tube was effective in reducing the radiation dose to staff members [8] . However, it is not yet known how effective a protective lead shield would be for protection in clinical practice. In this study, we assessed the level of occupational radiation exposure during ERCP and measured the radiation doses to staff members when a protective lead shield was used and was not used during ERCP to assess the effectiveness of the shield.

The subjects were medical staff members who had assisted in 80 consecutive therapeutic ERCP procedures performed at our hospital between August and October 2012. ERCP-related procedures under this study contained biliary drainage, pancreatic duct drainage, and lithotripsy, but balloon enteroscope-assisted ERCP which should need longer procedure time was excluded. The study design was prospective. Use of a protective lead shield was determined randomly for each ERCP procedure, and doses of scattered radiation to the medical staff members were measured. The randomization was performed using the shield envelope method. Consent regarding the random assignment of protective equipment and measurement of radiation doses was obtained in writing from the medical staff members.
The X-ray fluoroscopy generator was a CUREVISTA (Hitachi Medical Corporation, Japan). Examinations were performed at 25 × 25 cm and 30 pulses/second ( Figure 1 ). The protective lead shield was a Hagoromo X-ray protective curtain (Maeda & Co., Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) that attaches to the X-ray tube, which was modified with the newly developed protect shield created by Itoi and his colleague [9] . The hood of the protective equipment was placed over the X-ray tube and attached to four shielding sheets that hang down to the surface of the operating table. The shielding sheets are made of a lead equivalent that is 0.25 mm thick on the endoscopist's side and 0.125 mm thick on the other three sides. regardless of whether protective curtains were used, a PDM-117 semiconductor-type electronic pocket dosimeter (Hitachi Aloka Medical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was affixed to the left anterior chest area of the outside of each staff member's protective lead apron, and radiation doses (in Sv) were measured. Patients were sedated with 0.05-0.23 mg/kg of midazolam during the ERCP procedures. If the patient moved, the medical staff members manually restrained the patient. The cases that the patients were restrained by the medical staff members were made into "movement (+). " The patient's skin entrance dose (in mGy), as calculated by the fluoroscopy generator with the numerical dose determination (NDD) method [10] , was used to represent the radiation dose from the X-ray fluoroscopy generator.

Statistical analysis was performed with JMP 9 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC, USA). Wilcoxon tests or 2 tests were performed, and < 0.05 was considered significant.

For the 40 ERCP procedures (27 male patients, 13 female patients) in which protective curtains were not used, the mean procedure time was 26.8 min, and the mean skin entrance dose was 265.4 mGy. For the 40 ERCP procedures (20 male patients, 20 female patients) in which protective curtains were used, the mean procedure time was 28.5 min, and the mean skin entrance dose was 245.1 mGy ( Table 1) .
The mean radiation doses during ERCP when protective curtains were not used were 340.9, 27.5, 45.3, and 33.1 Sv for endoscopists, first assistants, second assistants, and nurses, respectively (Table 2) .
For cases in which the patient's movement had to be restrained during ERCP ( = 8), the mean radiation doses to the medical staff members, in the aforementioned order, were 375.3, 29.0, 161.4, and 63.5 Sv, respectively. For cases in which restraint was not required ( = 32), these mean radiation doses were 332.3, 27.1, 16.2, and 25.5 Sv, respectively. Additionally, for cases in which the patient had to be restrained, the radiation doses to second assistants and nurses when protective curtains were not used increased by factors of 9.95 ( < 0.001) ( Table 3) .
When protective curtains were used, the mean radiation doses to medical staff members were 42.6, 4.2, 13.1, and 10.6 Sv for endoscopists, first assistants, second assistants, and nurses, respectively. Use of protective curtains decreased the aforementioned doses by 87.5%, 84.7%, 71.1%, and 68.0% ( < 0.01) ( Table 2 ). The mean radiation doses during the 12 procedures in which protective curtains was used and body movement had to be restrained, in the same order as above, were 78.7, 6.8, 35.7, and 20.8 Sv (Table 4) . Values are presented as mean ± standard deviation.
The 1990 Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) set safety standards for radiation exposure of 500 mSv/year for skin and 150 mSv/year for eyes [11] . Exposure of medical staff members to radiation is a critical problem, but there has been very little discussion about the topic. It is well recognized among diagnostic and interventional radiologists that scatter radiation with overhead-tube fluoroscopic equipment is considerably higher than that with undercouch-tube equipment. Use of overhead-tube equipment is not recommended for interventional procedures that require a long fluoroscopic time [12] . However, overhead-tube equipment is still used frequently in endoscopic procedures. Consequently, the use of effective radiation protectors is important to avoid radiation injuries for medical staff members engaging in ERCP.
In this study, we assessed the effectiveness of protective curtains in reducing radiation exposure in clinical practice. We measured radiation from the outside of the protective lead apron, because, in a preliminary study, we found that radiation inside the apron was below detectable levels in a small number of cases. Occupational exposure for all medical staff members decreased when a protective curtain was used; the radiation dose to the endoscopist during one ERCP procedure decreased by 87.5%, and the radiation doses to other staff members decreased by 68-85%. Use of protective curtains reduced radiation in the air throughout the entire operating room, which likely contributed to the reduction in the radiation exposure of all medical staff members at the whole-body level. To ensure the safety of medical staff members, it is important to use not only standard protective equipment, such as radiation protective clothing and eyewear, but also protective curtains.
In this study, we measured radiation doses from each ERCP procedure with high-sensitivity semiconductor-type dosimeters. We found that the radiation dose to endoscopists was approximately ten times greater than that to any other member of the medical staff, which indicates that radiation is a much more substantial issue for endoscopists. Buls et al. and Sulieman et al. similarly found that the radiation dose to endoscopists during ERCP is the highest among all staff members, which is consistent with our results [2, 13] . The endoscopist cannot keep a distance from the patient, and thus multiple levels of protection, consisting of not only protective clothing and eyewear, but also protective curtains, are required to protect the endoscopist from radiation exposure.
In this study, we measured the radiation doses to staff members during each procedure and found that a patient's movement during the examination greatly influenced these doses. When a patient moved substantially, the radiation dose to second assistants increased by a factor of ten. Substantial patient movement can interfere with the ERCP procedure, and thus a staff member must manually restrain the patient in such cases. This task is typically performed by a second assistant, and it is difficult to keep a distance from the patient when doing so, which is likely why their radiation dose was higher. Although few cases require this kind of restraint, the patient's movement leads to a considerable increase in radiation exposure. Therefore, to reduce exposure, it is important to create an environment in which the staff members are not exposed to scattered radiation, even when close to the patient.
However, one disadvantage of using protective curtains is that it blocks the surgical team's view of the patient. It is essential to monitor breathing for safety management during ERCP, because patients are sedated, and thus it may be dangerous if the staff cannot visually confirm chest movements. However, it is also possible to monitor breathing with devices such as a pulse oximeter or a capnometer, and we did not experience any issues in this study. In addition, the protective curtains used in this study weighed approximately 8 kg and could potentially damage the fluoroscopy generator if left in place for a long time. Although this study only lasted two months, we have been using the protective curtains continually for approximately a year since the end of the study, and it has not caused any issue with the fluoroscopy generator. In addition, about the patient's exposure, there was no significant difference by the curtain use both in the preliminary phantom experiment and this present study.
It is essential to ensure the health and safety of medical staff members while providing patients with a higher standard of care. The radiation protective X-ray tube attachment that we tested in this study reduced the radiation dose to all medical staff and should become more widely used in the future.
Not only endoscopists, but also assistants and nurses are exposed to a high dose of radiation during ERCP, which is why appropriate measures must be taken. Use of protective curtains reduced the radiation dose to all medical staff members by shielding the entire operating room from scattered radiation and thus was very effective in reducing occupational radiation exposure.
The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996 (US Public Law 104-93) aimed to reduce federal welfare expenditures by changing eligibility criteria for public assistance. An important provision in the legislation determined that legal immigrants entering the United States on or after August 22, 1996 , would no longer be eligible for nonemergency Medicaid services. While PRWORA may have achieved substantial federal welfare savings [1] , there has been little investigation of its financial impact on hospitals that provide nonemergency services to medically uninsured legal immigrants.
A news story in 2000 highlighted instances in which documented and undocumented immigrants without health insurance remained in acute-care facilities after recovery, often resulting in hundreds of thousands of dollars in uncompensated care costs for the hospitals involved [2] . Because uninsured immigrants affected by PRWORA are eligible only for emergency Medicaid, they lack coverage for any form of postdischarge medical care (eg, acute rehabilitation, medical equipment, follow-up outpatient or home health care, and transfer to long-term care facilities or nursing homes) [2] . Since these services often constitute the prevailing standard of care for chronic or disabling conditions, hospitals may incur substantial expenses by keeping Medicaid-ineligible patients in acutecare facilities longer than necessary due to lack of suitable long-term care or rehabilitation options [2] .
Another news story in 2001 presented cases of legal immigrants who, due to PRWORA, could access funding for nonemergency health care and prescription drugs only through local safety net providers. The quality of these immigrants' health care and the availability of subsidized services varied widely according to the regional distribution of safety net providers and the range of services offered [3] .
Several studies have investigated the impact of PRWORA on Medicaid and/or welfare participation and patients' access to care [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] , but none have examined the impact of PRWORA on hospitals. A report by the New York Immigration Coalition [9] , as well as discussions by the Greater New York Hospital Association and the media suggest that the PRWORA provisions have had a negative financial impact on hospitals, especially those serving large immigrant populations [2, 11, 12] . In their 2000 case study examining hospitals' ability to meet rising demands for uncompensated care, the authors of the United Hospital Fund report put forward that in New York City, uncompensated care expenses would be expected to increase due to growth in numbers of immigrants ineligible for Medicaid coverage due to welfare reform [10] . Estimating the extent of projected financial loss to hospitals due to this specific policy provision is important to both hospitals and state policymakers as the legislation is renewed and reexamined.
In the 1990s, Congress moved to reform public spending by reducing the number of beneficiaries on welfare rolls. Reforms focused partly on immigrants, following testimony from the General Accounting Office estimating that slightly more than half of the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits provided to elderly persons were collected by noncitizens in 1995 [13, 14] . In justifying PRWORA [15] , the House Ways and Means Committee stated that it had been a basic tenet of US immigration policy since 1882 that legal immigrants should not be eligible for public benefits. Though Congress did not rescind emergency Medicaid from illegal immigrants, the legislation cited "a compelling government interest to remove the incentive for illegal immigration provided by the availability of public benefits" [13] . PRWORA was among several pieces of legislation in the mid-1990s -including California's Proposition 187 in 1994 and the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 [16] -that embodied substantive immigration policy changes, the specific provisions of which have been enforced in varying degrees according to government priorities.
PRWORA made several key reforms restricting public assistance for qualified immigrants [17] . Prior to the implementation of PRWORA, "qualified aliens" were eligible for the same federal means-tested benefits as US citizens. PRWORA makes an important distinction between "qualified" and "non-qualified" immigrants. The term qualified alien is used synonymously with legal immigrant and designates a noncitizen who falls into one of the following categories: (1) persons lawfully admitted for permanent residence; (2) persons granted asylum; (3) refugees; (4) persons paroled into the United States for at least one year; (5) persons for whom deportation is being withheld; and (6) persons granted conditional entry. The term nonqualified alien includes nonimmigrant visitors and undocumented/illegal immigrants.
After PRWORA, legal immigrants were declared ineligible for nonemergency Medicaid for their first 5 years in the country, with some exceptions, as described later. The Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) estimates that there were 10.5 million (± 350000) legal permanent residents residing in the United States as of April 1996 [18] . To qualify for Medicaid coverage after the ban, noncitizens must not receive public benefits during the 5-year period [15] . Legal immigrants receiving benefits at the time of enactment on August 22, 1996, were denied continuation of those benefits starting January 1, 1997. Benefits both before and after PRWORA for non-qualified aliens remained restricted to emergency Medicaid.
Before PRWORA, states did not consider immigration status in granting Medicaid assistance. After PRWORA, however, most legal immigrants arriving after August 1996 were barred from Medicaid and other state-funded assistance, at states' discretion. Exceptions were made for (1) refugees; (2) persons granted asylum and persons whose deportation was being withheld; (3) armed forces personnel or veterans and their dependent family members; and (4) legal permanent residents with 40 qualifying quarters of work [15] .
Under pressure from the White House and immigrants' advocacy groups, Congress restored some Medicaid benefits to certain legal immigrants as part of the Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997 [19, 20] . Under the BBA, a legal immigrant could qualify for Medicaid (not restricted to emergency Medicaid) through SSI eligibility if he or she was lawfully in the United States and receiving SSI benefits on August 22, 1996 , and subsequently certified under the SSI program as blind or disabled.
Noncitizens in the United States numbered approximately 17.8 million in 2000, or 6.5 percent of the total population [21] . Previous research has shown noncitizens to be more economically disadvantaged and to possess lower levels of health insurance than naturalized and native citizens. Census data suggest that noncitizens are more likely than citizens to be poor (29% vs 16%), despite the fact that noncitizen families are as likely as citizen families to have at least one full-time worker (82% vs 85%) [22] . In their report on insurance rates for Hispanic immigrants, the Commonwealth Fund Task Force on the Future of Health Insurance found that the longer Hispanic immigrants had been permanent residents of the United States, the more likely they were to be covered by employer-related insurance [23] . Among low-income immigrants in the United States in 1999, 59% were uninsured, compared to 30% of low-income citizens [22] . The Kaiser Commission reports that immigrants may underutilize health care regardless of insurance coverage, out of fear of jeopardizing their citizenship eligibility by incurring costs as public charges [22] .
Using data from several sources, we present snapshots of information currently available, and consider how the financial impact of PRWORA on hospitals might be estimated. Based on a review of relevant literature, we hypothesized that uncompensated hospital care would be more prevalent in states with lower rates of health insurance coverage, higher percentages of foreign-born residents (used to approximate the population of interest affected by PRWORA), higher rates of poverty, and greater percentages of teaching hospitals [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] . We outline the limitations of available data and discuss what information is needed to accurately estimate the outcome of interest.
Our goal was to examine the effects of PRWORA on hospital uncompensated care expenditures. The analysis consisted of two parts: a series of "data snapshots" to describe relevant information, and a multivariable regression to model drivers of uncompensated care costs. The regression analysis was conducted at the state level because no single source of data includes both patients' immigration status and the amount of uncompensated hospital care provided, thus precluding hospital-or patient-level analyses.
We collected the following state-level data for the period from 1994 through 1999: foreign-born, noncitizen population; health uninsurance rates; percentage of teaching hospitals as a proportion of all hospitals reporting data per state; and each state's decision regarding whether to implement the PRWORA Medicaid bar for legal permanent residents or to continue offering nonemergency Medicaid coverage using state-only funds. These factors are thought to influence expenditures per admission for uncompensated hospital care [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] and were examined at the state level for the period from 1994 to 1999 for a total of 300 observations (6 years × 50 states).
State-level data on the percentage of the population uninsured and the percentage of the population comprised of foreign-born noncitizens were obtained from the 2000 Current Population Survey, March Supplement, a detailed description of which is available elsewhere [21] . Because the Medicare program covers virtually all Americans aged 65 and older, data on insurance coverage rates among nonelderly populations were used. As the closest available proxy for the percentage of legal immigrants per state, we used the "foreign born, not a US citizen" category available in the Public Basic Monthly Survey for 1994 to 2001.
State-level poverty data were obtained from the historical poverty tables of the Census Bureau [29] . Poverty thresholds are stable across all regions and are adjusted for inflation every year using the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U).
Aggregate data on uncompensated care were obtained from the American Hospital Association's (AHA) nationwide Annual Survey of Hospitals [30] . AHA defines bad debt as the provision for actual or expected uncollectibles resulting from the extension of credit. Charity care services, however, are provided free of charge to individuals who meet certain financial criteria and are never expected to result in cash inflows. Total uncompensated care for hospitals on the state level was estimated as the sum of bad debt and charity care. For each state, we obtained a sample of all hospitals for which both charity care and bad debt data were available yearly from 1994 to 1999. We calculated uncompensated care per hospital admission as a per capita estimate of uncompensated care. These estimates were adjusted to 1999 US dollars using the medical care component of the CPI.
Teaching hospital status also was obtained from the AHA Annual Survey of Hospitals. The AHA defines teaching hospitals as those that are members of the Council of Teaching Hospitals of the Association of American Medical Colleges. Teaching hospital percentage refers to the percentage of hospitals classified as teaching hospitals out of the total number of hospitals in a state reporting data to AHA for the years of interest.
Although every state, excluding Wyoming and South Dakota, chose to preserve Medicaid coverage for immigrants who were eligible before the enactment of PRWORA (i.e., entering the United States before August 22, 1996) , states' decisions varied on whether to implement the 5-year bar on Medicaid eligibility for qualified immigrants after the enactment of PRWORA. Fourteen states (California, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nebraska, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Virginia, and Washington) maintained Medicaid eligibility for qualified immigrants entering the United States after August 22, 1996, through state-only funds [31] . We included a dichotomous variable in the model describing each state's implementation decision.
A multiple regression analysis was conducted to test the hypothesis that total uncompensated care (the sum of charity care and bad debt) per admission would be affected by a state's percentage of foreign-born residents, poverty rate, uninsurance rate, percentage of hospitals, and the state's implementation decision. Because total uncompensated care was heavily skewed, we used a log-transformed variable as the dependent variable. The resulting log-linear model has the convenient property of measuring the relative change in the dependent variable (uncompensated care) for an absolute change in a given predictor variable, controlling for other predictors in the model. Each year from 1994 through 1999 was entered into the model as a categorical variable, omitting 1994 as the reference year. We used the Huber [32] and White estimator [33, 34] , clustered on states, to obtain robust error estimates that allow for the lack of independence of observations within a given state over time.
Statistical analyses were performed using STATA version 6.0 (Stata Corporation, College Station, Tex) and SPLUS statistical software (Insightful Corporation, Seattle, Wash). This project was approved by the institutional review board of Duke University Medical Center. Figure 1 displays the percentage of immigrants for each state, according to US Census data. States with the highest percentages of foreign-born noncitizens in 1994 were California (18.4%), New York (10.9%), Florida (9.6%), Rhode Island (8.4%), and Nevada (8.4%). The national mean was 3.2 percent (SD, 3.59).



The total number of medically uninsured persons living in the United States is estimated to be 42.5 million, or 16% of the population [22] . As shown in Figure 2 , the states with the highest percentages of uninsured residents in 1994 were Texas (24.8%), New Mexico (23.5%), California (21.2%), Arizona (20.5%), and Alabama (19.4%). Texas and California are also among the states with the highest percentage of foreign-born residents, although California did not implement PRWORA's Medicaid eligibility bar.
Of the 6 states with the highest immigrant populations (70% of the total immigrant population of the United States), California and Illinois were the only states that preserved Medicaid coverage for qualified immigrants through state-only funds [22] . Thirty-six states eliminated Medicaid coverage during the 5-year bar [7, 31] Poverty Figure 3 displays the poverty rate for each state, according to US Census data. The national average was 13.1 (SD, 3.93). Three of the 10 states with the highest poverty rates in 1994 were also among the states with the highest percentage of foreign-born residents -Texas (19%), California (18%), and New York (17%). Figure 4 shows the amount of uncompensated care per admission provided by the states with the highest numbers of legal permanent residents (California, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, and Texas) from 1994 through 1999 and the average uncompensated care cost per year for the three-year periods before and after PRWORA's enactment.

Exploratory analyses showed that uninsurance was highly correlated with the state's poverty rate (r = 0.70). In addition, percentage foreign-born and percentage teaching hospitals were highly correlated (r = 0.30). To avoid collinearity and create a more robust model, poverty rate was dropped from the final multivariable regression model; percentage of teaching hospitals was dichotomized, assigning a value of 1 to states with 5% or more teaching hospitals. Both the dependent variable -uncompensated care per admission -and percentage foreign-born were used in log form due to nonnormal distributions revealed in exploratory analyses.
Results of the multivariable regression modeling (Table 1) suggest that, controlling for time and a state's foreignborn population, percentage of teaching hospitals, and implementation decision, a 1% increase in a state's uninsured population yields a 4.1% increase in the amount of uncompensated care provided (P < .001). Controlling for all other variables, a 1% increase in the log of a state's foreign-born population yields a 2.2% increase in uncompensated care, though this result was only significant at the .10 level. Percentage of teaching hospitals greater than 5% was found to be a weak predictor of uncompensated care, but was not significant (P = .601). A state's decision to implement PRWORA did not independently predict uncompensated care expenditures in our model. The trend variables corresponding to years were not significant.
PRWORA marked large-scale changes in health, immigration, and welfare policy in the United States. Patients, hos- > 9 percent (3) 7 to 8.9 percent (6) 4 to 6.9 percent (4) 2 to 3.9 percent (12) 0 to 1.9 percent (26) pitals, and state and federal governments have all had a stake in PRWORA's enactment. An accurate monetary estimate of the effects of PRWORA on hospital uncompensated care due to changes in Medicaid coverage would be useful to policymakers as PRWORA periodically comes up for consideration of renewal, and as anecdotal evidence of an adverse financial impact on hospitals continues to mount.
We hypothesized that hospital uncompensated care expenditures would be greater in states with higher percentages of foreign-born residents, lower rates of insurance coverage, and higher percentages of teaching hospitals.
Measured at the state level, hospital uncompensated care expenditures were not statistically significantly related to percentage foreign-born, percentage of teaching hospitals, or states' implementation decisions; in our model, higher uninsurance rates emerged as the only significant predictor of uncompensated hospital care expenditures. This finding suggests that efforts to reduce the number of people uninsured or underinsured would reduce hospitals' expenditures on uncompensated care. This implication reinforces claims that high rates of uninsurance in United States have negative effects, but does not directly address our original hypothesis about the immigrant eligibility provisions of PRWORA. As with other studies that have 
> 18 percent (6) 16 to 17.9 percent (8) 14 to 15.9 percent (5) 12 to 13.9 percent (13) 0 to 11.9 percent (19) Source: U.S. Census Data.
combined disparate data sources to assess the impact of PRWORA on the health or welfare of would-be beneficiaries [4] , data limitations posed a significant challenge to these analyses.
The proxy of percentage foreign-born may not have accurately captured the population of interest -legal immigrants arriving after August 22, 1996 , who were no longer eligible for nonemergency Medicaid coverage. Using the foreign-born category from the Census data relies on the assumption that states with higher foreign-born populations would also have a greater number of legal immigrants whose eligibility for nonemergency Medicaid would be affected by PRWORA. However, the foreignborn noncitizen category used in Census data (defined as any person not born a citizen of the United States and not naturalized) includes categories of persons exempted from PRWORA's Medicaid cuts, such as asylum seekers and refugees. Given that PRWORA requires states that provide health services to report illegal immigrants to authorities, it is unlikely that accurate data on immigration status and date of entry into the United States can be collected in the health care setting. In addition, it is unlikely that any institutional review board would approve the collection of such data in present circumstances.
Because the main effect of PRWORA was to restrict Medicaid eligibility, thereby increasing demand for uncompensated care, the present analysis focused on state-level parameters linked to demand for medical care. Uncom- pensated care reimbursement pools, common in states with former all-payer rate-setting systems, led to increased uncompensated care expenditures throughout the 1990s. In a deregulated health care system, however, states tended to use these funds to expand Medicaid and/or Medicaid managed care, thus shifting the focus of the pools to reimbursement for charity care only [35] . Because of the nonuniformity of states' approaches to uncompensated care pools, their limited use, and their changing roles over time, we did not include this factor in our final model.
A monetary estimate on a national, state, or hospital level of the financial impact of PRWORA remains difficult to ascertain due to data limitations. Ideally, such research would compare the costs before and after 1996 of the nonemergency care that hospitals provided (both as charity care and as bad debt) to the category of immigrants who lost nonemergency Medicaid eligibility due to the implementation of PRWORA. We would expect the extent and implications of this financial impact to vary according to both hospital characteristics and the populations served. Because a patient's immigration status is not recorded concomitantly with hospital resource use in any hospital, state, or federal database, it is not currently possible to isolate charity care and bad debt expenditures on An additional complicating factor is the possibility that, as a result of PRWORA, hospitals may provide and bill for services as emergency services that previously were categorized as nonemergency services in order to secure Medicaid payment. Similarities in income-related eligibility criteria for emergency and nonemergency Medicaid would facilitate reclassification. Further research should examine the extent to which providers reclassify services.
Traditionally, safety net hospitals have been supported though public funds, such as disproportionate-share hospital (DSH) payments. The Medicaid DSH payment is based on the assumption that certain hospitals, in addition to providing care to Medicaid enrollees, also serve indigent persons who are ineligible for Medicaid. However, there are some indications that public support mechanisms to hospitals may be in jeopardy [36] . First, DSH payments are large and repeatedly become targets for budget cuts by federal and state governments. As a result of provisions in the BBA, for example, it has been estimated that federal spending on Medicaid DSH will decrease by 11%, or $5.8 billion, during the period from 1998 through 2002. Since more Medicaid beneficiaries are being cared for in private facilities, public safety net hospitals may be affected by both competition for fee-forservice patients and decreases in overall DSH allotments [37] . Finally, safety net hospitals typically use Medicaid revenues to help fund uncompensated care; decreases in Medicaid reimbursements may, therefore, further impede hospitals' ability to provide services to the uninsured [38] .
Existing studies of trends in uncompensated hospital care expenditures have focused primarily on supply-side covariates, such as uncompensated care pools, Medicare and Medicaid DSH payments, and the degree of competition in the local health care marketplace [25, 28, 36, 39, 40] . While a focus on such hospital characteristics has helped to elucidate the factors that affect uncompensated care at the hospital level, the present study sought to examine the impact of the PRWORA legislation by identifying statelevel characteristics affecting total hospital uncompensated care per state from 1994 to 1999. Because data used for the regression model came from multiple sources, comprehensive year-by-year figures from 1994 through 1999 were available for all factors in the model only at the state level. Because PRWORA gave states the option of changing Medicaid coverage, state-level information is useful in understanding how PRWORA was implemented across the United States. However, to better assess the effects of PRWORA on hospitals, detailed hospital-specific information, at least at the level of metropolitan statistical area (MSA), would be needed on the immigration status of populations served. Data limitations currently hamper efforts to obtain a monetary estimate of hospitals' financial losses due specifically to PRWORA. To better quantify the impact of health policy regulations on health care providers, better data sources, particularly at the MSA level, are needed.
None declared.
LDC conceived of and designed the study, performed the statistical analysis, interpreted the data, and drafted the manuscript. JWT, VS, and LHC assisted in the statistical analysis, interpretation of data, and drafting of the article. KAF and KAS conceived of and designed the study and obtained funding. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 
tanoic acid (D-AP5) blocked the facilitation. However, the facilita-larization (Jöels and de Kloet 1990), thereby increasing the tion of LTD was not due to a potentiation of the isolated NMDA firing rate of a neuron to a maintained constant stimulus and receptor potential by RU-28362. The facilitation of LTD by thus enhancing neuronal excitability. Conversely, glucocorti-RU-28362 was also blocked by coincubation of the L-type voltage-coid receptor activation enhances the slow afterhyperpolardependent calcium channel (VDCC) antagonist nimodipine. Selec-ization (Jöels and de Kloet 1989; , resulting tive activation of the L-type VDCCs by the agonist Bay K 8644 in neuronal inhibition. The increase in the slow afterhyperpoalso facilitated LTD induction. Both nimodipine and D-AP5 were larization is thought to be mediated by an increase of the effective in blocking the facilitation of LTD by Bay K 8644. These calcium current through voltage-dependent calcium channels results indicate that L-type VDCCs can contribute to NMDA-(VDCCs) (Karst et al. 1994; Kerr et al. 1992 ).
receptor-dependent LTD induction.
CORT levels and LTP. Thus, under conditions in which mineralocorticoid receptors are selectively activated, CORT Changes in synaptic efficacy have long been hypothesized enhances LTP induction, whereas when glucocorticoid reto be important for memory formation in the CNS (Hebb ceptors are activated, LTP is suppressed (Kerr et al. 1994; 1949) . Two forms of synaptic plasticity are long-term poten- . CORT levels also alter the threshold tiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD). Although for LTD induction; either exogenous CORT (Bennett et al. these forms of synaptic plasticity are primarily dependent 1991) or selective activation of the glucocorticoid receptor on glutamatergic transmission for induction, it is apparent (Kerr et al. 1994 ) increases the probability of inducing dethat they are subject to extrinsic modulation by classical pression of the population spike following standard LTP neural transmitters and circulating hormones. induction protocols. This finding was confirmed in the denStressful events release adrenal hormones [e.g., corticotate gyrus . Thus stimuli that are effecsterone (CORT)] that are known to interfere with acquisitive for inducing LTP under low-CORT conditions become tion of certain behavioral learning paradigms (Diamond and effective for inducing LTD when the glucocorticoid receptor Rose 1994; Luine et al. 1994 ) and the induction of LTP (Foy et al. 1987; Shors et al. 1989) . CORT has been shown is activated. More recently, Kim et al. (1996) showed that the duration of the experiment. The slices were exposed to the exposure to an uncontrollable stress in vivo facilitates subsesteroids for a minimum of 2.5 h before LFS. Nimodipine, Bay K quent N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-receptor-dependent 8644, RU-28362, and RU-38486 were dissolved in 95% ethanol LTD induction in vitro. Thus glucocorticoid activation widand diluted to a final ethanol concentration of õ0.1%. CNQX ens the range of stimuli that are effective for LTD induction. was dissolved in 0.1 mM NaOH and diluted to a final NaOH Here we examine in more detail the mechanisms by which concentration of õ0.01%. Experiments with nimodipine and Bay stress hormones facilitate LTD induction by using the selec-K 8644 were conducted in a darkened room. tive glucocorticoid receptor agonist RU-28362. Our results Paired and Student's t-tests were performed to assess group indicate that glucocorticoid receptor activation effectively differences between the various treatments. Statistical significance lowers the threshold for LTD induction, and that the en-was determined at a confidence level of P õ 0.05. hancement of LTD is mediated partially by L-type VDCC activity. Aspects of this study have appeared in abstract form R E S U L T S (Coussens et al. 1996; Kerr et al. 1996) .
LFS at 0.5-mV field EPSP strength in normal aCSF resulted in a short-term depression that returned to baseline
by 30 min post-LFS (03 { 4%, mean { SE, n Å 6), in Transverse hippocampal slices (400 mm) were prepared from agreement with our previous findings ) adrenal-intact male Sprague-Dawley rats 1995). However, the addition of the glucocorticoid receptor as previously reported (Kerr et al. 1994) . In brief, animals were agonist RU-28362 (10 mM) ¢2 h before LFS led to the deeply anesthetized with gaseous methoxyfluothane and rapidly induction of a robust LTD (027 { 4%, n Å 9, P õ 0.01, Fig. decapitated. The hippocampus was dissected free in ice-cold me-1A). The facilitatory effect of RU-28362 was not readily dium and area CA3 was removed by a manual knife cut to eliminate possible development of seizurelike activity during stimulation. apparent until after the second bout of LFS. The facilitation Slices were transferred to a submersion chamber and constantly of LTD was not due to a difference in incubation time besuperfused (1-2 ml/min) with an artificial cerebrospinal fluid tween groups, and there was no apparent difference in the (aCSF, saturated with 95% O 2 -5% CO 2 ) consisting of (in mM) stimulation intensity required to evoke the 0.5-mV baseline 124 NaCl, 3.2 KCl, 1.25 NaH 2 PO 4 , 26 NaHCO 3 , 2.5 CaCl 2 , 1.3 test response. The facilitation was dose dependent, because MgCl 2 , and 10 D-glucose. Slices were allowed to equilibrate for 2 conditioning in the presence of 1 mM RU-28362 failed to h before recording while the temperature was slowly raised to the elicit an LTD significantly different from controls (010 { recording temperature of 32.5ЊC. (1-3 MV) filled with 2 M NaCl was placed in stratum radiatum vented the facilitation of LTD by 10 mM RU-28362 (04 { to record field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs). Data 3%, n Å 6, P ú 0.1). Taken together, these data indicate were acquired and stored for off-line analysis with the use of an that the RU-28362 effect is specific to the activation of glu-ASYST-based acquisition software developed in our laboratory. cocorticoid receptors. the NMDA receptor dependence of the RU-28362 effect.
Slices exhibiting a maximal field EPSP amplitude õ2.0 mV, D-AP5 blocked the facilitation of LTD by RU-28362 signs of hyperexcitability, or unstable baseline potentials (drift of (09 { 3%, n Å 6, not significantly different from untreated responses ú10% over the 20-min baseline recording period) were controls, Fig. 2A ). On washout of the D-AP5, LFS in the discarded from the study. The stimulation intensity was adjusted to produce an 0.5-mV field EPSP amplitude during baseline stimu-presence of RU-28362 induced a significant LTD (023 { lation (0.067 Hz). Conditioning stimulation consisted of two epi-3%, n Å 4, P õ 0.01).
sodes of low-frequency stimulation (LFS, 1 Hz, 600 pulses at the As noted, one action of glucocorticoid receptor activation baseline stimulation intensity) with 10 min between episodes. This is to increase the calcium current through VDCCs, including ''threshold'' conditioning procedure has been shown to produce the L-type VDCC (Karst et al. 1994; Kerr et al. 1992) . A: 2 episodes of low-frequency stimulation (LFS, 600 pulses, 1 Hz at baseline stimulation strength, denoted by horizontal bars) induced only a short-term depression in control slices (03 { 4%, mean { SE, ᭺, n Å 6). In the presence of 10 mM RU-28362, however, LFS induced LTD (027 { 4%, q, n Å 9). Data in this and other figures are mean % change of baseline { SE. Insets: sample traces (average of 5 sweeps) from baseline and 30 min post-LFS. Scale bar is 0.5 mV, 10 ms. B: action of RU-28362 is dose dependent, because 10 mM but not 1 mM (010 { 3, n Å 4) induced a significant LTD. Addition of 30 mM RU-38486 (specific glucocorticoid receptor antagonist) to the superfusate effectively blocked the facilitatory action of the agonist RU-28362 (04 { 3%, n Å 6). Asterisk: significant difference from control group, P õ 0.05).
corded for a further 3 h. Instead of an increase in responses, blocked the evoked potential, confirming that the field EPSP was mediated by NMDA receptors (Fig. 3) . RU-28362 administration led to a small decrease in the area under the curve of the NMDA-receptor-mediated potentials To determine whether the facilitation of LTD by RU-28362 can be explained by a direct effect on L-type VDCCs, (09 { 7%, n Å 5), which was not significantly different threshold conditioning stimulation was given in the presence from the small decrease also observed for untreated controls of the selective L-type VDCC agonist Bay K 8644. Bay K (n Å 4, Fig. 3 ). These data clearly indicate that the facilita-8644 (0.5 mM) caused a facilitation of LTD equivalent to tion of LTD by RU-28362 is not due to an upregulation of that produced by RU-28362 (026 { 6%, n Å 5, P õ 0.02, NMDA receptor function. Later in the experiment, 50 mM Fig. 4A ), and this effect was blocked by the coapplication nimodipine was added to the aCSF for the RU-28362-treated of 20 mM nimodipine (06 { 3%, n Å 4, P õ 0.01 vs. Bay slices to see whether L-type VDCCs contribute to the evoked K 8644 alone, Fig. 4A ). Similar to the RU-28362 facilitapotential. Nimodipine application did lead to a further small tion, the LTD induced in the presence of Bay K 8644 was decrease, supporting previous studies (Dingledine 1983; No- still dependent on the activation of NMDA receptors, bewak et al. 1993). However, the control slices, which had cause bath application of 50 mM D-AP5 prevented LTD not received nimodipine, also showed a small response decinduction in the presence of Bay K 8644 (08 { 5%, n Å rement at the corresponding time in the experiment. Thus it 5, P õ 0.05 vs. Bay K 8644 alone, Fig. 4B ). remains unclear whether VDCCs contribute significantly to the NMDA-receptor-dependent evoked potentials under the The above findings indicate that L-type VDCCs can contribute to the induction of homosynaptic LTD. On the other hand, present conditions. At the end of the experiment, D-AP5 (50 mM) was added to the perfusing medium and completely LTD has typically been reported to be primarily dependent on The present experiments demonstrate that selective activations (Bolshakov and Siegelbaum 1994; Christie et al. 1996;  tion of glucocorticoid receptors facilitates homosynaptic Otani and Connor 1996) . To test whether L-type VDCCs con-LTD induction by threshold conditioning stimulation in a tribute to LTD under stronger stimulation conditions, a more dose-dependent fashion. These results are consistent with robust induction protocol was used whereby stimulation prothe findings of Kim et al. (1996) , who found that behavioral ducing 1-mV responses during LFS was given in the presence stress lowered the threshold for homosynaptic LTD inducof 1 mM PTX, resulting in 020 { 2% LTD (n Å 7). This tion as studied ex vivo. By applying the selective glucocorti-LTD was not blocked by 50 mM nimodipine (017 { 5%, coid receptor agonist RU-23862 directly to the slices, hown Å 6, not significant relative to controls), but was blocked ever, we have been able to exclude other physiological by 50 mM D-AP5 (03 { 4%, n Å 5, P õ 0.05, Fig. 5 ). This responses to stress, such as adrenal medullary hormone resuggests that, under stronger LTD-inducing conditions, L-type lease, as necessary contributors to the LTD facilitation effect. VDCCs become redundant and NMDA receptor activation alone is sufficient to induce LTD.
These data suggest that the LTD facilitation observed by 2/ , 20 mM picrotoxin (PTX)] were maintained for 20 min and then exposed to 10 mM RU-28362 (q). Responses were monitored for an additional 3 h and compared with those from control, untreated slices (᭺), using the area under curve as primary measurement. After 2.5 h, 50 mM nimodipine was added to RU-28362-treated slices (indicated by horizontal bar). After another 30 min (3 h after the start of RU-28362), 50 mM D-AP5 was added to all slices to confirm NMDA receptor dependence of evoked responses. Insets: sample traces (average of 5 sweeps) from baseline (1), 2.5 h after RU-28362 commencement (2), and after D-AP5 application (3). Scale bar: 0.5 mV, 20 ms. Kim et al. (1996) may also have been due primarily to the indicating that activation of L-type VDCCs is critical for this form of LTD. This finding is consistent with the fact activation of glucocorticoid receptors directly in the hippocampus. The possibility that activation of mineralocorticoid that glucocorticoid receptor activation upregulates VDCCs in a protein-synthesis-dependent manner (Kerr et al. 1992) . receptors is necessary, but not sufficient, to observe this effect cannot be ruled out, because in both studies tissue In addition, the similarity between the LTD facilitation by RU-28362 and that promoted by the L-type VDCC agonist was obtained from adrenal-intact animals, which would be expected to exhibit occupation of these high-affinity recep-BAY K 8644 in the present experiments supports the hypothesis that RU-28362 affects LTD through regulation of tors by circulating CORT. Additionally, it may be that dimers of activated mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid re-VDCCs. The BAY K 8644 experiments also confirm that L-type VDCCs contribute to homosynaptic LTD in adult ceptors, which may increase the functional diversity of corticosteroid action (Trapp and Holsboer 1996; Trapp et al. rats under some circumstances. 1994), mediate the facilitation of LTD.
Despite the reliance of RU-28362-facilitated LTD on VDCC activation, the LTD also remained NMDA receptor dependent, a finding consistent with the stress-induced faciliFacilitation of homosynaptic LTD and the role of VDCCs tation of LTD observed by Kim et al. (1996) . Thus it appears that L-type VDCCs can work cooperatively with NMDA Although activation of L-type VDCCs has been reported receptors, and that at threshold levels of stimulation, activato facilitate the induction of the heterosynaptic form of LTD tion of neither calcium channel alone is sufficient to generate in the hippocampus (Wickens and Abraham 1991), a block LTD. The fact that at higher strengths of stimulation of VDCCs has not generally affected homosynaptic LTD L-type VDCCs did not contribute to LTD suggests that their (Kerr and Abraham 1995; Mulkey and Malenka 1992) , with contribution at threshold is one of promoting NMDA recepsome exceptions (Bolshakov and Siegelbaum 1994; Christie tor function, although we cannot rule out the possibility et Otani and Conner 1996) . In the present experiments, nimodipine blocked the LTD elicited in RU-28362, that under yet stronger activation conditions, VDCCs may mediate an NMDA-receptor-independent LTD (Otani and channels was greatly reduced by lowering extracellular Mg 2/ , the present experiment does not rule out the possibilConnor 1996). Cooperative interactions could occur through a variety of means. For example, VDCC activation might 1) ity of a contribution by VDCC activation to NMDA receptor channel function by a depolarization mechanism, when promote NMDA receptor activation by elevating membrane depolarization during synaptic activation, 2) add to the tested in normal medium.
A more indirect method for the promotion of LTD by NMDA-receptor-mediated calcium transients occurring during synaptic stimulation, or 3) potentiate NMDA receptor VDCCs is also worth noting. Several labs have reported that activation of NMDA receptors during a period of hyperpolarfunction by activation of calcium-dependent protein kinases or phosphatases that regulate NMDA receptor function. In ization or synaptic inhibition successfully induces homosynaptic LTD (Debanne et al. 1994 ; Stanton and Sejnowski the present experiment we have shown that NMDA receptor function is not upregulated by RU-28362, thus ruling out 1989; Thiels et al. 1994; Xie et al. 1992) . In the present experiments, enhancement of VDCC activity by RU-28362 the latter possibility. This finding is consistent with a previous report showing no change in NMDA receptor binding may promote calcium-dependent slow afterhyperpolarizations, thereby providing the postsynaptic hyperpolarization following stress (Clark and Cotman 1992 (Fig. 6A ). Small increases in activity above resting levels will produce LTD, whereas greater activity will produce LTP. The crossover point between LTD and LTP is termed u M . A similar model has been proposed by Artola and Singer (1993) (ABS rule), who use the term u / in the same way as the BCM model uses u M , but additionally define the threshold for LTD as u 0 . Because the plasticity thresholds are defined in terms of postsynaptic activity (BCM model), reflecting perhaps NMDA receptor activation (Bear et al. 1987) or the level of the postsynaptic calcium transient (ABS rule), then the activity level of a test pathway is only one determinant of which threshold, if either, is crossed. Activity in converging inputs, or modulatory influences by other neurotransmitter systems and circulating hormones, could also have a substantial impact. There is now considerable evidence that binding of corticosteroids to their receptors can influence the direction and degree of synaptic plasticity generated by a particular paradigm. The FIG . 5. L-type VDCC activation is not necessary for LTD under stronger stimulation protocols. In the presence of 1 mM PTX, LFS delivered at 1-mV field excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) strength induced LTD (020 { 2%, n Å 7), which was blocked by 50 mM D-AP5 (03 { 4%, n Å 5). However, coapplication of 50 mM nimodipine had no effect on LTD induction (017 { 5%, n Å 6). Asterisk: significant difference from PTX-only group (P õ 0.05). LTD. Deciding between these possible modes of interaction between VDCCs and NMDA receptors requires further investigation.
It is notable that the facilitation of LTD by RU-28362 was not evident until after the second bout of LFS. This pattern also occurs in control slices given conditioning stimulation above threshold for LTD induction (Kerr and Abraham 1995) . It is thus apparent in both instances that although LTD is largely induced by the second bout of LFS, the first bout of LFS ''primes'' the synapses for the subsequent induction of LTD. This priming effect is similar to that previously reported for perforant path-granule cell synapses in vivo (Christie and Abraham 1992). The question is then raised as to whether RU-28362 acts by facilitating priming mechanisms or LTD induction/expression mechanisms. This is a difficult issue to resolve, and is one that also pertains to many other studies of LTD induced by long trains of LFS. For the present purposes, we have ascribed the RU-28362 action to the observable effect, namely, the facilitation of LTD, as is conventional for studies of this kind. However, ing u 0 to the left and u M (u / ) to the right (Fig. 6A) and to make LTP harder to elicit. It should be noted that Induction and reversal of long-term potentiation by low and high-intensity these threshold shifts refer to the level of afferent activity theta pattern stimulation. J. Neurosci. 15: 5402-5410, 1995. that normally is required to induce LTD or LTP, and not BEAR, M. F., COOPER, L. N., AND EBNER, F. F. A physiological basis for a necessarily to subsequent biophysical or biochemical events theory of synaptic modification. Science Wash. DC 237: 42-48, 1987. (e.g., the level of postsynaptic calcium critical for triggering BENNETT The present experiments demonstrate that activation of excitatory amino acid binding. Brain Res. 585: 161-168, 1992. glucocorticoid receptors effectively lowers the threshold for COUSSENS, C., KERR, D. S., AND ABRAHAM, W. C. Facilitation of NMDA receptor-dependent homosynaptic LTD by the type II corticosteroid rehomosynaptic LTD induction in the hippocampus of mature ceptor agonist RU-28362. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 22: 1518 rats, a finding in good correspondence with a recent demon-DEBANNE, D., GAHWILER, B. H., AND THOMPSON, S. M. Asynchronous prestration that stress exerts the same effects (Kim et al. 1996) . and postsynaptic activity induces associative long-term depression in area Thus, although homosynaptic LTD is more difficult to in-CA1 of the rat hippocampus in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91: 1148 -1152 duce in mature rats relative to juveniles (Dudek and Bear Acad. Sci. 746: 411-416, 1994. induction in a novel way, by promoting L-type VDCC acti-DINGLEDINE, R. N-methyl aspartate activates voltage-dependent calcium conductance in rat hippocampal pyramidal cells. J. Physiol. Lond. 343: vation. It is interesting, however, that this LTD nonetheless 385-405, 1983. remains NMDA receptor dependent. These results suggest Acad. Sci. USA 89: 4363-4367, 1992. tions, and therefore contribute to the facilitation of LTD FOY, M. R., STANTON, M. E., LEVINE, S., AND THOMPSON, R. F. Behavioral stress impairs long-term potentiation in rodent hippocampus. Behav. Neuduring stress or aging, which are characterized by an elevaral Biol. 48: 138-149, 1987. tion of circulating CORT (Kim et al. 1996 
For more than a century, diseases of humans have been classified in a dichotomous fashion as infectious and non-infectious. In the former group, causality has been framed in the context of Koch's postulates, in most cases linking a single microbe with a single disease. This approach, although incomplete from a patho-physiological point of view, has led to enormous advances in the prevention and treatment of infectious diseases. During the last decade, a huge amount of data has been gathered on the composition of the human microbiota in health and disease. Nowadays, almost no sickness has been overlooked by this trend, and there is expanding information on the complex configuration of the human microbiota in almost every illness. Interestingly, this knowledge includes not only non-infectious chronic diseases such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, inflammatory bowel disease, and many others but also a growing list of infectious diseases that were traditionally ascribed to a single pathogen behaving as a lone warrior against the host. For example, in AIDS, a disease caused by the HIV virus, a perturbed microbiota is found in the vagina of women with a higher predisposition to contract the infection [1] , in the gut of patients already infected with HIV [2] , and also in HIV-negative neonates born to mothers who received successful anti-retroviral therapy [3] . As an additional example, Staphylococcus aureus lives as a dormant pathobiont in the nares of more than a third of healthy individuals. Recent investigations have shown that this bacterium remains confined to the nares due to an intricate interaction with other organisms. For example, the nearby presence of Staphylococcus lugdunensis kills S. aureus through a newly discovered antibiotic termed lugdunin [4] . On the other hand, the adjacent growth of Corynebacterium striatum and S. aureus results in diminished expression of virulence genes of S. aureus but augmented expression of genes involved in non-virulent colonization [5] . Switching roles from defenders to attackers, S. lugdunensis or C. striatum may cause serious infections [6, 7] . S. aureus cohabitating other body sites, for example, the lungs, may increase the virulence of other microbes in the vicinity [8] . Escherichia coli, a major member of the gut microbiota, may cause life-threatening infections. Conversely, probiotic strains of the same bacterium may prevent recurrence of bladder infections in women [9] or the development of rampant cholera infection in experimental settings [10] . Many other microbes, acting as endogenous or exogenous pathobionts, may appear to act as independent aggressors, but their ability to trigger disease is actually orchestrated and regulated by members of the microbiome/microbiota. For example, carriage of the arbovirus is influenced by the microbiota of its mosquito vector [11] and attraction of biting mosquitoes is dependent on the individual's skin microbiota [12] .
We are still in a difficult position to optimally define a "normal" or "healthy" microbiota. As in ecological niches, there are multiple states of equilibrium corresponding to healthy states. For example, some of the biomarkers for dysbiosis include an increase in beta (between sample) diversity, a decrease in alpha (within sample) diversity, an increase in the abundance of members of Proteobacteria and opportunistic pathobionts, and an increase in inflammatory markers. As summarized in Fig. 1a , these changes happen not only in obese individuals ("bad" or "diseased" microbiome) but also in women in their third trimester ("good" or "healthy" microbiome) [13, 14] .
Interestingly, an adverse outcome of influenza and a suboptimal immunogenicity of the flu vaccine are influenced by these conditions, in humans and experimental animals ( Fig. 1) [15] [16] [17] [18] . Similar interactions between pathobionts, the microbiota, and the host are increasingly being described in animals and plants [19] [20] [21] . In sick corals, there is a significant change in the ranking order of viruses that are also present in healthy specimens but with a distinct load for each type of virus [22] . Fig. 1 What is a good microbiome? A typical example of the tripartite interaction between a common virus, the host, and the microbiota. a Some strains of the influenza virus cause more severe disease in obese persons or mice as well as in third-trimester pregnant woman. This occurrence correlates with a disturbed gut microbiota. b In addition, suboptimal responses to the flu vaccine are found in these populations
In light of this paradigm, we suggest that novel ways to establish complex causation, as opposed to associations between a perturbed microbiota and a sick host, should be developed. Under this scheme, elucidation of causality becomes a very difficult task which can be compared metaphorically to untying a Gordian knot. Alternatively, we can apply an ecological approach and recognize that disease affects not the host but the holobiont in all its complexity. When doing research on the microbiota, we are actually dealing with an intricate system composed by microbial individuals interacting in a social fashion. Consequently, when trying to understand holobionts in health and disease, we may apply novel methods developed by social and economic scientists [23] . Relatively simplified biomarkers for selected diseases may be looked for and calculated by complex computational methods based on parameters such as microbial diversity of the microbiota, predominance or absence of specific species of bacteria, levels of defined metabolites, and other.
Words have an extraordinary power [24] . Some (like pathogen or pathogenicity) may obscure the right interpretation of biological processes, and other words may facilitate the clarification of complex developments [25] . We claim that the introduction of certain terms to the world of Medicine may greatly improve our understanding of both health and disease. These words include holobionts, pathobionts, and pathobiome (a disturbed or dysbiotic microbiome).
The current classification of diseases into infectious and non-infectious should be revised. While there may be one or more pathobionts playing a central role in the former case, there is a concurrent perturbation of the microbiota which can either precede or follow the introduction of the pathobiont/s into the holobiont system. The diagnosis of classic infectious diseases is performed by well-established methods including microscopic observation of a specific microbe, culture-dependent and culture-independent molecular techniques such as PCR, or the detection of specific antibodies as a result of an active infection. Still, under this approach, important questions remain unanswered. For example, one might ask why certain hosts develop disease, while others remain healthy. In contrast, dysbiotic or perturbed states of the microbiota are not routinely evaluated in clinical practice due to their complexity and the scarcity of simple ways to characterize them. The multiplicity of co-factors and the slow progression of their effects on holobionts complicate the elucidation of the pathogenesis of many metabolic, inflammatory, degenerative, neoplastic, and even psychiatric diseases. The interaction between specific genetic mutations, the microbiota, and environmental factors have been extensively studied in certain diseases such as Crohn's disease, both in humans and animal models [26] . In contrast, the characteristics of the microbiota remain still unexplored in individuals with certain common genetic conditions such as Tay-Sachs, thalassemia, neurofibromatosis, and Jackson-Weiss syndrome. In other examples, such as cystic fibrosis [27] , Huntington disease [28] , severe combined immunodeficiency disorder [29] , and sickle cell disease [30] , a growing body of information is emerging on associated disturbances of the microbiota. The currently consolidating idea that interactive co-evolution of the host with its microbiota is an important driving force for evolution may predict future elucidations in the mechanisms of a holobiont becoming sick [31] . In recent years, the major roles played by environmental factors in the development of these diseases of holobionts have begun to be deciphered. Among others, these factors include overuse of antibiotics-especially at critical periods of life-cesarean sections, avoidance of breast feeding, unhealthy diets, and exposure to toxic substances. The proposed paradigm has the potential to develop novel preventive and therapeutic approaches. We suggest applying a strong ecologic attitude toward the preservation of health in all holobionts on Earth.
Albert Einstein discovered noise accidentally in 1905, when he observed that atoms move according to the Brownian molecular motion [1] . Following his discovery, numerous descriptions of physical and biological systems have made incidental reference to noise, without recognizing its essential contribution. Noise is often regarded as an unwanted component or disturbance to a system, even though it has a tremendous impact on many aspects of science and technology [1] , including medicine and biology. A typical example for such a statement is a field of engineering called signal processing. On one hand, many signal processing algorithms have been designed to remove noise from a system, since greater noise levels are associated with degraded performance of algorithms.
On the other hand, noise has been shown to enhance system performance in many areas of signal * Ervin Sejdić is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Swanson School of Enginering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15261, USA. E-mail: esejdic@ieee.org. Ervin Sejdić is the corresponding author.
† Lewis A. Lipsitz is with Harvard Medical School, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Hebrew Senior Life, processing including stochastic optimization techniques, genetic algorithms, dithering, just to name a few. Similarly, another concept called stochastic resonance (SR), first proposed in 1981 (e.g., [2] , [3] ), describes a positive impact of noise in nonlinear systems. SR refers to the fact that at an optimal level of input noise, signal detection is enhanced [4] , [5] . SR is observed in both man-made and naturally occurring nonlinear systems [6] . For example, paddlefish were shown to use SR to locate and capture prey, implicating this phenomenon in animal behavior [7] . Also, small noisy input can influence the firing patterns of squid axons [8] , enhance breathing stability in pre-term infants [9] , improve postural control in human aging, stroke or peripheral neuropathy [10] , [11] , and stabilize gait in elderly people with recurrent falls [12] .
The intent of this manuscript is to inform researchers from multiple scientific disciplines that noise (i.e., stochastic processes) is a critical component of many biological and physiological systems that may be exploited in the future to develop interventions for the prevention and treatment of diseases. In other words, this manuscript is a crossover between a review paper and a position paper and as such is meant to initiate further discussions about the role of stochastic processes in modeling of physiological systems.
To gather previous contributions cited in this manuscript, we utilized PubMed and Google Scholar to find manuscript published in English using a variety of search terms (e.g., "noise physiology," "noise medicine," "noise brain," "noise aging"). These search terms yielded thousands of manuscripts and we focused only on representative publications from several fields. Extensive coverage of all topics is beyond the scope of this paper, since excellent extensive reviews of each have been previously published (e.g., [6] , [13] ).
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces various stochastic processes considered in biomedical systems, while also describing the physiological meaning of these processes. Section 3 discusses the important role of noise in fundamental biomedical systems. In Section 4, we discuss several translational applications of noise to treat diseases, while in Section 5, we provide concluding remarks along with an outline of possible future directions.
2 Noise and variability in physiological systems
By definition, noise is a stochastic process with specific spectral characteristics. While many different stochastic processes exist, we consider here the most common types discussed in the literature.
White noise is a stochastic process characterized by equal energy over all frequencies. In mathematical terms, its power spectral density is equal to:
where C w is a constant. The name "white" stems from the fact its power spectral density is the same at all frequencies in an analogy to the frequency spectrum of white light. A time-domain realization of the white noise is depicted in Fig. 1 (a), while its power spectral density is depicted in Fig. 1 
Pink noise (also called fractal or 1/f noise) is a stochastic process suitable for modeling evolutionary or developmental systems characterized by equal energy per octave as depicted in Fig 1(d) [14]. The power spectral density of pink noise is roughly inversely proportional to frequency [14] :
where C f is a constant and 0 < α < 2. 1/f noise is a stochastic process between white noise
(1/f 0 ) and red (Brownian) noise (1/f 2 ); hence, the name pink noise. Pink or fractal noise is found in numerous biological and physiological processes, including the organization of neural networks, Purkinje fibers in the heart, the vascular tree, bronchial tree, and bone trabeculae, as well as electroencephalographic rhythms, heart rate variability, and respiratory intervals [15] , [16] .The omnipresence of pink noise in many diverse applications has led researchers to speculate that there exists some profound law of nature that applies to all nonequilibrium systems and results in such noise [14] .
Because pink or fractal noise arises from the interaction of multiple physiologic or biologic control systems operating over different scales in time or space, it may confer system resiliency, adaptability, and structural integrity. For example, the structural (e.g. bone trabeculae) or functional (e.g., heart rate control) networks that generate such noise retain their integrity or functional ability if individual components are lost or interrupted. This fractal network organization also enables a system to adapt to stress by drawing on specific components and fine tuning its response to overcome a given perturbation [16] . Brownian or red noise is a stochastic process whose power spectral density, as depicted in Fig. 1(f), is defined as:
where C b is a constant.Mathematically, the Brownian noise can be defined as the integral of the white noise.
There are other types of noise specific to certain applications (e.g., blue noise, diotic noise, and dichotic noise). However, the extensive coverage of these topics is beyond the scope of the current manuscript.
Physiology teaches us that healthy systems are self-regulated to reduce variability and maintain physiologic constancy [17] . However, that is not the case in reality. Small amounts of noise, as depicted in Fig. 2(a) , can have a very beneficial role in physiological systems (e.g., [9] , [10] , [15] , [16] ). Also, the non-linear interactions of multiple regulatory systems and environmental influences operating over different time scales produce highly variable "noisy" behaviours in physiological processes that are far from constant [18] . For example, the normal human heartbeat fluctuates in a complex stochastic manner [17] , and can be modeled as a 1/f process (e.g., [19] ).
On the contrary, the stochastic properties of the heartbeat time series degrade in subjects at high risk of sudden death (e.g., congestive heart failure patients) becoming more characteristic of white noise. This situation is depicted in Fig. 2(b) , where a deviation from 1/f noise can result in reduced functional capacity and the onset of disease. Similar counterintuitive results have been obtained in other fields. For example, gene expression can be thought of as a stochastic process [18] , [20] . Stochastic gene variations can have both beneficial and harmful roles. Different patterns of gene expression can influence the stress response, metabolism, development, the cell cycle, circadian rhythms, and aging [18] . Therefore, elucidating the stochastic mechanisms involved in physiologic control systems and complex signaling networks is emerging as a major challenge in the postgenomic era [17] .
A number of studies elucidating the fundamental mechanisms of biological systems suggest that noise is an "essential ingredient" in these systems, without which they cannot function. For example, noise plays an important role in molecular transitions or interactions that control cellular behavior (e.g., how cells acquire fate) [21] . Furthermore, several mathematical models used to describe biological processes require a noise term to adequately model the behaviour of these processes.
Cellular processes, such as transcription and translation, chromatin remodeling and pathwayspecific regulation, are sources of stochastic events leading to cell-to-cell variability [18] , [22] . In fact, cellular behaviour varies in clonal cell populations despite their development in identical environments [23] .
Stochastic processes can have a dual role in these systems. One point of view is that the stochasticity obstructs the efficient functioning of cellular processes [24] . The accuracy of cellular processes, such as the circadian oscillator, is limited by noise in gene expression [20] . Noise can interfere with the operation of engineered genetic circuits [25] and cell-to-cell variability can be reduced by engineering a circuit with negative feedback [26] . There is also evidence that aging is associated with increased randomness in gene expression [18] . For example, cell type-specific gene expressions in individual murine cardiac myocytes [27] , murine muscle tissues [28] and C. elegans [29] become increasingly stochastic as the organism ages. While the mechanisms underlying these stochastic phenomena are still unclear, the process of aging may be dependent on the effects of stochastic gene expression [18] . Another interpretation of these observations is that changes in gene expression with aging are associated with a shift from the more adaptive 1/f or fractal-like noise, to more random or white noise-like behavior that cannot adapt to the metabolic demands of the aged cell. This notion will need experimental validation.
The second point of view is that noise might have beneficial properties [30] . For example, living cells usually acquire their fate deterministically by virtue of their lineage or their proximity to an inductive signal from another cell. However, a cell can choose to differentiate stochastically without apparent regard to environment or history [31] . This random behavior can arise from significant stochastic fluctuations (i.e., noise) in cellular components and biochemical reactions [30] , [32] . Additionally, differences in the micro-environments inhabited by individual cells and preexisting heterogeneity propagated to subsequent cell generations can be sources of such cell-to-cell variations [33] . Cell-to-cell variability is thus a complex function of regulation of gene expression and the regulatory and biochemical networks in which the gene products are embedded [30] .
Neuronal networks are known to have noisy, heterogeneous and compact structures [34] , [35] . There are two points of view regarding the role of noise in these networks. One point of view argues that noise lowers the signal-to-noise ratio causing the performance of these networks to degrade. The second point of view states that noise reduces spike-timing precision and therefore, the information rate is lowered. However, noise can play important and constructive roles for the amplification of information transfer in neuronal networks [36] , [37] .
Stochastic variations are an essential part of the nervous system [37] , and the effects of these variations in dynamical neurobiological systems have been studied extensively for both single neurons and neural networks. Pioneering works by Derksen and Verveen in 1966 [38] and by Katz and Miledi in 1970 [39] were the first to establish the probabilistic behavior of neurons in the central nervous system [34] . Derksen and Verveen investigated the role of membrane noise in the probabilistic behavior of neurons in the central nervous system [38] , while Katz and Miledi studied signal fluctuations associated with ACh receptor-mediated muscle depolarization [39] . The foundations set by these two groups were later applied to experimental data to gain an insight into the nature of transmembrane-conductance changes and information processing in the brain [34] . Subsequent publications showed that intracellular recordings of cortical neurons consistently display highly complex and irregular activity due to an intense and sustained discharge of presynaptic neurons in the cortical network [36] .
In addition to synaptic noise, the stochastic activity of ion channels is another significant source of noise in the nervous system. For example, thermal agitation causes voltage-gated ion channels in neuronal membranes to fluctuate randomly between conducting and nonconducting states inducing noisy membrane currents and subthreshold voltage fluctuations [40] , [41] . It is now understood that channel noise affects spike-timing reliability, action potential dynamics, signal detection, the tuning properties of the cell and overall has important effects on neuronal information processing capabilities [36] , [40] , [41] . Lastly, while noise often leads to increased responsiveness in the nervous system, empirical data and neuronal models demonstrate that noise can also subdue or turn off repetitive neuronal activity [8] , [42] .
Noise generated in the brain may influence brain behavior. Noise is generated in the brain by random spike firing times of neurons [13] . By influencing the variability of the firing of neurons, noise may influence decision-making, memory, and the stability of short-term memory and attention [43] . Furthermore, cognitive operations are also affected by stochasticity in N-methyl-D-aspartate activated receptors, which affect the stability of short-term memory and attention, and in alterations of gamma-amino-butyric acid receptor activated synaptic ion channel conductances which are predicted to influence how likely the system is to jump incorrectly into a pathological state of high activity [13] . Similarly, in motor learning, the brain uses movement errors to adjust planning of future movements. This physiologically plausible strategy is optimally tuned to the properties of motor noise, and likely underlies learning in many motor tasks [44] .
Overall, noise in the brain promotes decision-making, creativity and the shifting of attention to new tasks [13] . The presence of stochastic brain variations (e.g., due to stochastic variations in spiking of neurons and in synaptic transmissions) is helping investigators and clinicians to understand pathological brain stability states, such as schizophrenia and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
One notion is that there is a range of stability states in different individuals. Instability (e.g., due
to random firing of neurons) contributes to the symptoms of schizophrenia [45] , while too much stability contributes to the symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder [45] . Of potentially great importance is that by having a model that is based on the ion channel conductances affected by different neurotransmitters, it is becoming possible to make predictions about what could be favorable combinations of treatments for particular disorders [45] .
Noise is omnipresent in sensory systems, ranging from the emission of neurotransmitters from the presynaptic membrane to the behavioral results in visual and auditory experiments (e.g., [6] , [46] , [47] , [48] , [49] , [50] , [51] ). For example, a recent study suggested that the addition of an appropriate amount of external noise can improve the perception of an "uncertain" visual signal that is difficult to detect [52] , [53] . Figure 3 depicts how adding an appropriate amount of noise improves image contrast and then degrades as we add too much noise [54] . Noise of a particular magnitude (i.e., the SR effect) also tends to enhance visually evoked responses in electroencephalography (e.g., [55] ) and magnetoencephalography studies (e.g., [56] ). Similarly, in [57] , the authors showed that a certain amount of noise reduced the pedestal effect, i.e., the improved detectability of a grating in the presence of a low-contrast masking grating. Their results supported the idea that a single mechanism underlies the pedestal effect and stochastic resonance in contrast perception [57] . 1/f noise is also effective in driving hallucinatory pattern formation as shown in [58] , where the authors explored the relationship between ordinary stimulus-controlled pattern perception and the autonomous hallucinatory geometrical pattern formation that occurs for unstructured visual stimulation (e.g., empty-field flicker). Similar results were observed in human hearing experiments [4] . 
Noise is a necessary component even in modeling of certain biomedical systems. In some cases, noise has a specific physiological meaning, while in others, limited knowledge about the systems under investigation yielded creation of a noise category to capture variability observed in experimental data. The next few subsections briefly cover some of the most well-known models requiring a noise term in order to adequately describe a function of a biomedical system. Although there are many more mathematical models that require a noise term in order to accurately model the phenomenon under consideration, it is beyond the scope of this manuscript to review all these different models.
The Hodgkin-Huxley model, one of the most important models in biomedicine, describes membrane potential, activation of Na and K currents, and inactivation of Na current [59] . Specifically, the Hodgkin-Huxley model describes the spiking behavior and refractory properties of neurons and serves as a paradigm for spiking neurons based on the nonlinear conductance of ion channels [60] .
The model is given by four nonlinear coupled equations, one for the membrane potential V , and three for gating variables m, n, and h:
where m ∞ , h ∞ , n ∞ , τ m , τ h , τ n represent the saturation values and the relaxation times of the gating variables. The membrane potential is driven by three types of currents: ionic current I ion , external stimulus current I ext , and synaptic current I syn . I ion is related to the gating variables of m, n, h and describes the ionic transport through the membrane:
where V N a , V K , V l are the corresponding reversal potentials and the constants g N a , g K , and g l are the maximal conductances for ion and leakage channels. I ext is the external stimulus usually serving as a bifurcation parameter of the system. I syn is the sum of the current inputs from all synapses connected to the other neurons and can be modeled as:
where ξ(t) is Gaussian white noise, and σ and τ d are the intensity and the correlation time of the synaptic noise, respectively [60] . Fig. 4 examines the effects of varying σ on the membrane potential, V . As σ decreases, the potentials become highly regular as depicted in Fig. 4(d) . This shows that without noise in the organism, the human body would be a highly deterministic system, and would not be able to account for any changes in the environment.
The Hodgkin-Huxley-type models are important not only because their parameters are biophysically meaningful and measurable, but also because they allow us to investigate questions related to synaptic integration, dendritic cable filtering, effects of dendritic morphology, the interplay between ionic currents, and other issues related to single cell dynamics [59] and there are extensions to various other fields such as cardiology (e.g., [61] ) in the literature.
The Fitz Hugh-Nagumo model is a simple but representative example of excitable systems that occur in application ranging from kinetics of chemical reactions and solid-state physics to biomedical processes [62] . Originally it was suggested for the description of nerve pulses [62] , but it found its applications in other fields as well. The equations are:
where ε << 1 is a small parameter allowing one to separate all fast and slow motions; the parameter α governs the character of solutions; and the parameter σ governs the amplitude of the noisy external force ξ assumed to be additive white Gaussian noise with zero mean [62] .
Similarly as the Hodgkin-Huxley model, the Fitz Hugh-Nagumo model is sensitive to the magnitude of σ as depicted in Fig. 5 . The presence of noise is necessary in order for the model to accurately represent a biomedical process. 
Cancer is stimulated by successive somatic mutations [63] . Here, we briefly review a stochastic model for the computation of cancer risks based on the hypothesis of two successive mutations [63] .
The model assumes that cells likely to mutate will divide over the lifetime of the tissue. Next, the number of type 1 mutation cells produced over the lifetime of the tissue is distributed according to the Poisson distribution with mean µ. The branching process begins with the appearance of the first type 1 cell. This type 1 cell may die with probability 1 − p 1 . The second option is that the type 1 cell divides in two type 1 cells with probability p 1 . At each division of a type 1 cell, there is a probability p 2 for each daughter cell to be a type 2 cell. The probability that a branching process started by a single type 1 cell eventually gives birth to at least one type 2 cell may be computed exactly:
The number of type 1 branching processes that eventually produce at least one type 2 cell is given by the Poisson distribution with mean µP b (p 1 , p 2 ). Hence, the probability that cancer will occur in a particular tissue is given by
The parameter µ is crucial in this model as shown in Figure 6 , as its value will dictate the shape of the probability density function of cancer. For small values of µ, the probability of cancer is almost negligible, even when the probability of type 1 cell branching increases past 50%. However, as we increase the mean number of first mutations to µ = 100, the probability of cancer becomes 100%, as the probability of type 1 cell branching increases past 50%.
Here, we present several applications of noise to enhance health. Also, we briefly discuss how noise (i.e., stochastic processes) can be used to model the effects of aging or social networks.
Noise-based bioengineering techniques and medical devices can play an important role for treating diseases and enhancing health overall. From a clinical standpoint, noise-based techniques and devices have been used to enhance signal detection in patients with significant sensory deficits, such as older adults [64] , [65] , patients with diabetic neuropathy [66] , patients with stroke [67] , or profoundly deaf people receiving speech cues by direct electrical stimulation of the cochlear nerve [68] . Nose-based devices have been used to increase tactile sensations [69] , [70] to help post-partum women achieve higher pelvic floor muscle activation [71] , or to alleviate postural instability due to ankle sprains [72] , [73] and lower back pain [74] . Noise-based solutions can even be used for the enhancement of brain-to-computer interfaces [75] .
Noise-based devices, such as randomly vibrating shoe insoles [10] that apply noise during specific activities or throughout the day, may enable people to overcome functional difficulties due to age-related sensory loss [11] , [64] , [76] , [77] , [78] , [79] . Furthermore, noise-based mechanical ventilators can improve gas exchange and could have a significant effect on morbidity by breaking the chain of injury propagation in acute lung injury [80] . These devices could potentially reduce the morbidity associated with various health issues, such as sensory loss and postural instability in elderly and disabled people or to help stroke patients and individuals with muscle and joint injuries in rehabilitation activities [64] . Noise-based techniques could potentially accelerate a patient's rehabilitation. In this regard, the ultimate realization of a noise-based device may be one that provides durable benefit that lasts long after the device is removed [76] .
Noise has detrimental effects on cognitive performance due to the competition for attentional resources between the distracting and the target stimuli. This has been observed for a wide variety of tasks and stimuli as well as in different participant populations [81] , [82] . However, recent empirical evidence suggests that noise can also improve central processing and cognitive performance. For example, auditory noise enhanced the speed of arithmetic computations [83] and recall on visual memory tasks [84] . Thus, adding a moderate level of noise to the input of the information processing system can increase its signal-to-noise output. On the other hand, adding too little or too much noise attenuates performance [82] . This is consistent with the phenomenon of SR. Noise exerted a positive effect on cognitive performance for patients with the attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, indicating that these subjects need more noise than controls for optimal cognitive performance [82] . The Moderate Brain Arousal model suggests that noise in the environment introduces internal noise into the neural system through the perceptual system. This noise induces SR in the neurotransmitter systems and makes noise beneficial for cognitive performance [81] . Similarly, a recent experiment showed that background noise had opposing effects on inattentive and attentive children. While it enhanced performance for the former group, background noise deteriorated performance for latter group. Background noise also reduced episodic memory differences between these two groups of school children. This suggests that cognitive performance can be moderated by external background white noise stimulation in a non-clinical group of inattentive participants [82] . However, one should be aware that these stochastic resonance effects were not always present [50] .
As described above, many healthy physiologic processes exhibit stochastic variations due to multiple regulatory influences operating over different time scales. These influences include biochemical pathways, opening and closing of ion chambers, feed-forward and feed-back loops, temperature fluctuations, circadian rhythms and environmental changes. Together, they produce pink noise in the output signal as is evident in healthy heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, electroencephalographic potentials, or center-of-pressure time series [15] , [16] . These noise signals lose their 1/f characteristics with aging and disease due to the degradation of various control mechanisms and their interactions, becoming more white or Brownian. As a result, the organism loses resiliency or adaptive capacity [15] , [16] .
This has been demonstrated in the postural control system by examining the body's centerof-pressure (COP) excursions while standing on a force plate [85] . Under normal circumstances, the COP time series exhibits 1/f behaviour, characteristic of pink noise. However, with the loss of vision, sensation in the feet, or both, there is a progressive loss of complexity and long-range correlations in the data. As a result, the individual has more difficulty adapting to a superimposed cognitive task (e.g., counting backwards while standing) and postural sway increases [85] .
Similarly, anatomic structures lose fractal-like architecture with aging, leading to a loss of functionality. This is evident in degeneration and loss of connectivity of the bone trabecular network leading to osteoporosis and fractures; the breakdown of fractal-like alveoli in the lungs leading to emphysema; and the disruption of the collagen matrix in the dermis leading to skin fragility and hemorrhage. In addition, age-related diseases such as the Alzheimer's (e.g., [86] ) or Parkinson's (e.g., [87] ) diseases affect the stochastic variations of physiological variables. For example, the insole forces during the freezing of gait in patients with the Parkinson's disease have been shown to have stochastic behaviour similar to a Brownian process [87] . Furthermore, Parkinson's patients lose the noisy, fractal-like physiologic tremor of the normal motor control system and develop a highly periodic tremor, which is characteristic of their disease. Fortunately, there is evidence that noise can be restored in at least the postural control system by exploiting the phenomenon of SR. When subsensory vibratory white noise was applied to the soles of the feet in healthy elderly subjects while standing on a force plate, the fractal-like multiscale complexity of COP displacements increased to values similar to those seen in young subjects [65] . This intriguing finding supports the notion that noise is an important component of a healthy, and highly functional, postural control system.
Noise has also been shown to play role in the social sciences. For example, the psychic structure long known as the "self" is best conceptualized as a dynamical stochastic system [88] . Among the various topics addressed in this field, it has been found that models for opinion formation in a society exhibit a rich variety of nonlinear behavior, such as phase transitions and critical phenomena, stochastic resonance, chaos, and bistability [89] . In fact, the existence of SR in a model of opinion formation yields the appealing implication that there is an optimal noise level for a population to respond to an external "fashion" modulation. Lower noise intensities lead to the dominance of the majority's opinion, irrespective of external influences, while sufficiently stronger random fluctuations prevent the formation of a definite collective opinion [90] .
Since the recognition of noise at the beginning of the twentieth century, the prevalent view in most fields is that noise degrades system performance and most real-life events do not exhibit noise-like behavior. In this manuscript, we reviewed several biomedical fields where noise plays a constructive role and in some cases is necessary for a biomedical system to function properly. Such a constructive behavior is particularly obvious in systems that depend on the complex interactions of many different components operating on different time scales (i.e., nonlinear systems). Therefore, most of the research efforts have been geared towards:
• understanding the sources of stochastic fluctuations in biomedical systems and possible advantages and/or adverse consequences of these fluctuations on the systems;
• understanding why and how these systems have become robust in their noisy environments; and • how we can use noise to develop treatments and enhance human health.
Further development of noise-based devices or treatments in biomedicine depends on available computational and experimental tools that will answer questions about the the origins of noise in physiological systems and the mechanisms by which noise affects their function. On the computational side, we need to develop more sophisticated algorithms that are capable of simultaneously extracting important stochastic and deterministic variations from the system and handle huge amounts of data. Also, the software applications needed for the understanding of noise in biomedical/physiological systems are almost non-existent. Most computational investigations are carried out using custom-made functions or toolboxes via commercially available packages such as MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) or SAS (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). On the experimental side, we need to develop experiments and tools that can characterize the noise behavior in systems. The ultimate goal for these advances is to achieve full stochastic resolution over different scales and systems. However, a plan for wide dissemination of data acquired in these experiments should be embedded in these projects to accelerate advances in noise physiology. We anticipate that a limited number of laboratories will have necessary monetary, equipment and staff resources needed to carry some of these sophisticated experiments.
Noise is potentially a very powerful tool in physiology and medicine. We hope this paper will catalyze further research and applications of noise to improve human health and ameliorate diseases.
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) of the brain are commonly treated in multimodality fashion, with endovascular embolization followed by surgical extirpation being one of the most effective strategies. Embolization can reduce blood loss and minimize complications associated with microsurgery for AVMs. Frameless stereotactic image guidance can also be used to make AVM resection safer. Image guidance has become standard in cranial neurosurgery, increasing the accuracy of craniotomy and allowing for smaller scalp incisions and bone flaps. Although image guidance for AVM surgery has been previously described in the literature, the optimal timing and imaging modality have not been established.
The capabilities of modern angiographic platforms have recently improved substantially. Two-dimensional (2D) digital subtraction angiography (DSA) can now be enhanced by 3D, functional, and axial-anatomic adjunctive technologies. One such technology, rotational angiography, also known as cone-beam CT angiography (CBCT-A), uses the full capability of modern C-arm digital angiography systems available in neuroendovascular suites. An angiographic imaging study immediately prior to surgical resection can provide important information to a cerebrovascular surgeon. In this study we review a series of cases in which CBCT-A was performed preoperatively, either with or without an endovascular intervention, to assist in the image-guided surgical resection of cerebral AVMs. The use of CBCT-A has been tested in laboratory/cadaveric studies by other groups; 1 we report its use in a series of patients at two different institutions.

The objective of the study was to retrospectively review demographic, clinical, and imaging data for all patients who underwent surgical treatment of their AVM with the aid of intraoperative image guidance using preoperatively obtained CBCT-A. All such AVM resections done by the senior authors (EAMD, AA) from 2011 to 2014 were retrospectively reviewed. Electronic medical records, including clinic and hospital records, as well as relevant imaging were analyzed.
Most neuroendovascular interventions are facilitated by single-plane or biplane C-arm systems. Classically, diagnosis and treatment of vascular anomalies has relied on 2D vascular imaging for visualization. Yet recent advancements have seen a transition from systems employing image-intensifier detectors to flat-panel detectors (FPD). [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] This transition has enabled rapid acquisition of 3D vascular images (3D DSA) as well as CBCT soft tissue imaging, with and without contrast agent present. 2 The acquisition procedure for a C-arm based volumetric scan is as follows: first, images are acquired during a semicircular rotation around the patient, with image acquisition performed at discrete intervals (150-600 images depending on the target). Next, contrast agent is injected and the same acquisition procedure is repeated. The images are processed for detector effects (offset and gain correction) and physical effects (scattered radiation and X-ray beam hardening), and reconstructed using a modification of the filtered back projection (FBP) algorithm. 5 Nonsubtracted images yield CT-like images, while subtraction of the two runs with subsequent reconstruction yields a high-quality representation of the vascular anatomy.
The volumetric data acquired in the interventional suite were exported to the navigation system in the DICOM format using a 512×512×396 matrix size and a homogeneous voxel resolution of 0.47 mm. The data were loaded onto the navigation system (StealthStation S7, Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) using either PACS transfer or manual upload. Additional patient data from preoperatively obtained MRI or CT scanning were imported as well in some cases. The different datasets were registered using rigid registration. Following patient positioning and immobilization using a Mayfield clamp, skin line tracing registration was performed using either DynaCT or Stealth-protocol CT registration models. Approach planning as well as navigation was performed using the datasets from all modalities and the surgeon preference for each modality was noted after the case (figure 1). The minimal voxel resolution yielded by the systems employed (Artis Zee Biplane, Siemens Healthcare, Forchheim, Germany) was 0.46 mm (homogenous voxel side length). Neither navigation nor initial data fusion in the navigation system was impeded.

Our series included 16 patients with AVMs treated at Baylor College of Medicine and Semmes-Murphey Neurologic and Spine Institute (table 1) . Demographics, lesion characteristics, and treatment modalities are similar to modern published series of AVM management. 7 Regardless of whether or not the patients received preoperative endovascular treatment for their AVM, all patients underwent a diagnostic angiogram and DynaCT prior to neurosurgical intervention. This included the nine patients in our cohort who presented with rupture, who also required urgent neurocritical care and intracranial pressure management such as ventriculostomy placement. The embolic agent of choice in most cases was Onyx 18; n-butyl cyanoacrylate (n-BCA) was also used primarily or as an adjunct in some cases (table 1) .
Patients underwent either staged or immediate preoperative embolization of their lesions. At the end of the final endovascular procedure a CBCT-A was obtained. In non-emergency cases the cerebrovascular surgeon had the opportunity to evaluate and analyze these images in 3D, with custom reconstructions showing lesional angioarchitecture as well as areas of embolization. This is shown in a flowchart (figure 2).
CBCT images were noted to have high spatial resolution and homogeneous sub-mm voxel size provided by the FPD-based C-arm system. With the systems used by the authors (Artis Zee Biplane and Artis Zeego, Siemens Medical Solutions), a dedicated scan protocol for neurosurgery yielded three volumes from one dual-spin CBCT acquisition with concurrent contrast agent injection: 3D-DSA, providing a high resolution image of the patient's vasculature, allowing delineation of the nidus and other critical structures for AVM treatment; a CT-like image (DynaCT) displaying the position of injected embolic agent with respect to the patient's anatomy; and a CT angiography (CTA)-like image giving information on the patient's vasculature and the injected embolic agent with respect to the patient's anatomy (DynaCTA) ( figure  3A-C) . In addition, this scan protocol allowed for an accurate representation of the patient's skin line for tracer-based registration on a stereotactic navigation system and focused on including the top of the head and tip of the nose to ease registration (figure 3D).
Patients were transferred from the endovascular suite to the operating room and their heads were fixed in a radiolucent Mayfield head-holder. CBCT images were then loaded into the frameless neuronavigation system (Medtronic StealthStation S7). Registration was performed using the 'tracer' method and confirmed with anatomical landmarks. For planning of scalp incision and craniotomy flap, the Medtronic passive planar blunt probe was used. Thereafter, the operating microscope was integrated and used as the navigated instrument. In our series there were two strategies for using the images obtained in the angiography suite; one author used a standard Stealth protocol CT merged with the DynaCTA images (figure 4) while the other author used the DynaCTA images alone. There did not appear to be a difference between these strategies with regard to the quality of images or accuracy of navigation. Most frequently, the CTA-like images in three planes were used for surgical navigation, with the 3D view as an adjunct (figure 4). Indocyanine Green (ICG) video angiograms were used to confirm resection of the AVM prior to closure in most cases, and all cases had postoperative completion angiography to assess for completeness of resection (table 1) . Complete resection was confirmed by postoperative angiography. In two cases abnormal vasculature was identified on postoperative angiography. Perinidal hypervascularity is a common finding and must be distinguished from true AVM nidus both preoperatively and on postoperative angiography. We preoperatively did not intend to resect the areas identified on the postoperative angiograms, and our presumption is that these areas will normalize radiographically over time. No shunting was exhibited on any postoperative angiogram.
The modern treatment paradigm for many AVMs now entails a combination of preoperative embolization followed by neurosurgical excision, especially those with Spetzler-Martin grades 3 or B.
8 In our series of 16 patients with AVMs treated at two institutions, CBCT-A allowed for safe and accurate surgical extirpation following evaluation and treatment in the angiography suite.
AVMs can be assessed preoperatively and intraoperatively with a wide variety of imaging modalities including CT, CTA, AVMs, arteriovenous malformations; n-BCA, n-butyl cyanoacrylate. Figure 2 Workflow to incorporate three-dimensional (3D) angiographic imaging into a navigation system. Following catheter placement, high-quality 3D digital subtraction angiography (DSA) acquisition is performed capturing the head and the nose of the patient. The data acquired yield a soft cone-beam CT (CBCT) with opacified vasculature from fill acquisition, as well as a 3D DSA depicting the angioarchitecture. The data are transferred to the navigation system and vendor-specific image fusion to preoperative data is performed. The CBCT image is selected for skin line registration and navigation is commenced.
MRI, and DSA. Each of these modalities has drawbacks, including the time necessary to obtain them. MRI visualization of AVMs often shows a pattern of flow voids 9 and allows assessment of brain parenchyma and proximity to eloquent cortex. MRI yields comparatively little information about angioarchitecture and blood flow, but excels in gyral and sulcal definition and is the best modality for identification of potentially eloquent parenchymal structures. Furthermore, MRI can be timeconsuming and may misrepresent qualities of the nidus, 10 as artifact from dense embolisate such as Onyx or n-BCA can cause significant image degradation. CTA can provide high quality imaging of large vessels, but visualization of small intracranial vasculature and complex pathological anatomy (such as AVMs) remains challenging. This is due to comparably low spatial resolution (∼1 mm maximally), differentiation challenges near bony anatomy due to non-subtracted imaging, and the lack of vessel-selective imaging. 11 CTA also suffers from a lack of time resolution, making angiographic evaluation invaluable for a comprehensive understanding of the flow patterns that characterize many of the potential symptoms and complications associated with the natural history and treatment of AVMs.
The combination of DSA and CBCT-A, on the other hand, uses the full capability of modern C-arm digital angiography systems. Such imaging provides crucial information on an AVM, its angioarchitecture and relationships to bone and surrounding brain structures, and has distinct advantages over the other imaging modalities. 12 13 Previous authors have described and compared the effectiveness of CBCT-A against DSA in assessing AVM dimension, arterial feeders, venous drainage, nidal density, and shunting; 14 all of this information is further provided in three dimensions instead of two. 15 Furthermore, CBCT-A overcomes the limitations of DSA with use in neuronavigation systems by acquisition of skin line tracings, allowing it to be used as a stand-alone reference image. 1 CBCT-A has also been shown to be useful in the assessment of AVMs following hemorrhage, especially when DSA does not sufficiently show the lesion. 12 Specifically, CBCT-A allows for accurate assessment of the AVM nidus for optimal treatment planning, whether during the preoperative neuroendovascular phase of treatment or during microsurgical intervention. [16] [17] [18] Our use of a low-dose contrast injection while simultaneously repeating the rotational scan allowed subtraction of the radially distributed projection images and subsequent reconstruction of a high-detail volumetric image of the patient's vasculature. This was useful during preoperative planning and intraoperatively. The CTA-like (CBCT-A) images which were reconstructed were loaded into the image guidance system allowed for real-time accounting of the progress of dissection.
It should be noted that the benefits of CBCT-A do not render traditional DSA obsolete nor supplant it as the gold standard. Instead, CBCT-A functions as an extremely useful adjunct that is most commonly acquired following DSA, offering its own unique strengths. MRI can be (and was) fused with CBCT-A images in our series and provided important contextual brain anatomy, especially for AVMs close to eloquent areas. Hybrid operating rooms have become popular in recent years, allowing both endovascular interventions and traditional neurosurgical procedures to occur without patient transfer, 19 often by the same comprehensive cerebrovascular surgeon. These rooms have the capability of rapid imaging and assessment of the lesion, as well as providing a sterile field for open surgical intervention. In the presented series, CBCT-A and interventions were performed in an endovascular suite separate from the operating room, but our experience with integration of DynaCTA images in neuronavigation suggests that this technology and strategy may be even more seamless in hybrid neurovascular suites. With the benefit of avoiding patient transfer, total operative times can be shortened. Furthermore, intraoperative DynaCTA images could be obtained to allow for updated navigation, to confirm excision, and upon closing to assess for a hematoma. In a hybrid suite, with maintained microsurgical exposure, post-resection confirmation of complete exclusion of the lesion could occur at a far higher resolution than traditional fluoroscopy-based methods. 15 20 The use of this technology and resulting workflow created several evident advantages. Intraoperative differentiation between embolized areas of the AVM and active areas seen via the microscope were confirmed on the DynaCTA navigation. Furthermore, in those cases treated soon after rupture, it enhanced identification of the lesion within the hematoma. Approach to the deep borders of the malformations was greatly aided, minimizing the need for excessive corticectomy. The extent of resection was probably improved with the aid of DynaCTA and could perhaps be further improved with its use in a hybrid neurovascular suite.
The care of cerebrovascular patients is becoming more integrated in terms of treatment strategies, location of care, and even providers. Potential areas for further development include better integration of the radiographic images and reconstructions with the microscope via more advanced heads-up displays. The enhancement of image quality by a variety of postprocessing techniques has progressed significantly in recent years and should continue. Examples include metallic artifact reduction and region of interest analysis, which can be combined to produce remarkably vivid images despite the presence of dense metal objects. [21] [22] [23] These emerging technologies available with Siemens and other angiography equipment can help visualize AVMs and differentiate residual lesion and embolisate. 
There are notable limitations to CBCT-A, but it is not intended to supersede the gold standard, conventional angiography. Other imaging modalities such as MRI provide anatomical context, and are synergistic with CBCT-A through fusion of DICOM images in neuronavigation systems. Most of the AVMs in our series were fed from a single circulation, especially after embolization, and the CBCT-A images were created by injection within a single vessel. Vascular malformations fed by both anterior and posterior circulations, internal and external branches, or bilateral feeding require special consideration. We are currently working with an angiography platform manufacturer on rotational angiography fusion techniques to allow for improved visualization of multiple circulations and radiodense embolic agents using color differentiation. Fusion and post-processing may thus obviate the need for dual catheter injections which increase the risk, complexity, and time of an angiographic procedure.
Nidus that is distal to embolized arteries may be incompletely visualized by CBCT-A following embolization because contrast will not flow into it. MRI is a useful modality for identifying residual nidus in these cases, and was used as an adjunct in most of our cases. Many cases were also imaged intraoperatively with indocyanine videoangiography, which can identify areas of the surgical bed that may deserve closer inspection to rule out the presence of residual nidus. ICG was used in most cases, based on the intraoperative specifics of each surgery. There are welldescribed limitations of ICG videoangiography in AVM surgery, [24] [25] [26] but it can still serve as a useful adjunct-for example, to ensure complete obliteration of feeding to a nidus prior to dividing the main draining vein. One of the most important pitfalls that should be noted, however, is the difficulty in seeing beyond dissected parenchyma to identify residual nidus. Large residuals will illuminate through thin layers of parenchyma but small residuals may very well not be identified. Intraoperative angiography in a proper suite is valuable, a point that should be acknowledged, but is not routinely necessary and carries some risk. Intraoperative DSA, possibly with CBCT-A, in a hybrid operating room may represent the ideal solution in the future.
We present a novel application of CBCT-A in the treatment of AVMs, both for preoperative surgical planning and an intraoperative reference during neuronavigation. The additional resolution of AVM angioarchitecture provided by this imaging as well as the efficient workflow inherent in the technology hold promise for further and better integration of the traditional dichotomy ('open' and 'endovascular') in cerebrovascular treatments. Funding This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
The construction of single-chain or hybrid proteins is a potentially powerful method for generating proteins with novel functions and improved properties (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) . A critical element in such efforts is the design of the peptide linkers that serve to connect different protein domains or subunits. Designed linkers are usually glycine-based peptides with lengths calculated to span the minimum distance between the C terminus of one subunit or domain and the N terminus of the next. How important is linker design in determining the properties of single-chain proteins? Alterations in linker regions have been found to affect the stability, oligomeric state, proteolytic resistance, and solubility of single-chain proteins (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) , but few systematic investigations of these relationships have been reported. Here, we test the effects of linker design on the stability, protein folding kinetics, and biological activity of single-chain Arc repressor. Wild-type Arc is a dimer with identical subunits, and Arc-L1-Arc is a single-chain variant with a 15-residue linker connecting the subunits (see Fig. 1 ). The L1 linker of Arc-L1-Arc holds the subunits at an effective concentration (C eff ) of 3 mM. By varying linker length and composition, we have isolated single-chain variants with effective subunit concentrations ranging from 10 M to 10 M, corresponding to changes in the free energy of unfolding (⌬G u ) from 3 to 11 kcal͞mol. These differences in stability arise from changes in the folding and unfolding rates, suggesting that linker design can affect protein stability by altering the free energies of both the native and denatured states.
Cassettes coding for glycine-rich linkers ranging from 3 to 59 residues ( Fig. 3A) were synthesized using an Applied Biosystems 381A DNA synthesizer and were purified as described (9) . A precursor plasmid (pLA3), constructed to facilitate subcloning of linker library cassettes, contains tandem arc genes connected by a GGT ACC GGT adapter, which encodes Gly-Thr-Gly and contains unique KpnI and AgeI restriction sites. Cassette libraries coding for 19-residue linkers with different amounts of Gly or Ala were constructed by synthesizing an oligonucleotide, which formed a hairpin:
The underlined sequences are KpnI sites. S represents a mixture of G and C, and thus, the GSA codons encode either glycine (GGA) or alanine (GCA). Three otherwise identical oligonucleotides with different G͞C ratios at the randomized positions (1:1; 3:1; 1:3) were synthesized to facilitate identification of a wide range of compositions. A cassette library encoding random combinations of glycine (GGT) and serine (AGT) was constructed in the same manner. Second strand synthesis was carried out using Sequenase v.2.0 (United States Biochemical) for 2 h at 37°C in Sequenase buffer containing 1 mM dNTPs. Cassettes were digested with KpnI and ligated to the KpnI backbone of pLA3. Following transformation into Escherichia coli strain HB101, colonies were picked randomly and the appropriate region of the single-chain arc gene was sequenced using the dideoxy method. Plasmid DNA encoding in-frame constructs were transformed into E. coli strain UA2F for assays of activity in vivo (24) and into E. coli X90-O cells for protein expression. All single-chain Arc proteins contained a (His) 6 tail to facilitate purification using Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid chromatography. Protein purification, fluorescence and circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy, analytical ultracentrifugation, and gel mobility-shift assays were performed as described (9, 25) . Protein stability was assayed by urea denaturation by following changes in intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence intensity at 337 nm or CD ellipticity at 234 nm. For these experiments, the protein concentration was 10 M in buffer containing 50 mM Tris⅐HCl (pH 7.5 at 25°C), 250 mM KCl, and 0.1 mM EDTA (26) . Values of ⌬G u and m were obtained by fitting denaturation data to a two-state model by nonlinear least squares methods (26 (26) . Stopped-flow kinetic experiments of protein folding and unfolding were monitored by changes in fluorescence at protein concentrations between 1 and 10 M in the buffer used for stability measurements (26) . Unfolding was initiated by urea-jump experiments (mixing ratio 1:10) to yield a final urea concentration of 7 or 9.1 M. Refolding was initiated by mixing protein denatured in 6.0-9.6 M urea with low urea buffer (1:5 ratio) to yield final urea concentrations between 1.0 and 4.5 M. Rate constants were obtained by fitting the kinetic data to single exponentials. In all cases, the residuals of the fits were distributed randomly. For ease of comparison among each library of variants, rates were either measured at a single urea concentration or measured at a series of urea concentrations and extrapolated to this reference concentration by using linear regression of ln(k) vs.
[urea] plots (R Ͼ 0.99).

A library of single-chain arc genes with linkers composed of Gly, Ser, and Thr and lengths varying from 3 to 59 aa was constructed (Fig. 3A) . The fraction of Gly in different linkers ranges from 66 to 80%. The linkers and corresponding proteins are named LLX and Arc-LLX-Arc (Length Library, X ϭ number of residues), respectively. No intracellular expression of the Arc-LL8-Arc protein was detected. Arc-LL3-Arc expressed to high levels but monomers, dimers, and higher-order oligomers were observed following SDS electrophoresis and Western analysis. This behavior may indicate ''cross-folding'' as has been observed with single-chain antibodies that have very short linkers (27, 28) . The remaining 13 proteins in this library were all expressed at high levels and electrophoresed as monomers. The Arc-LLX-Arc variants were tested for repression of transcription of the P ant promoter in E. coli strain UA2F, using resistance to streptomycin as an assay of biological activity (24) . Arc-LLX-Arc proteins with linkers containing 13 or more residues had wild-type activities. Arc-LL11-Arc was partially active; single-chain molecules with the LL3, LL8, and LL9 linkers were inactive. Modeling studies show that connecting the Arc subunits with linkers shorter than 13 residues would either require the linker to cross the DNA-binding surface of the protein and͞or require distortion of the structure.
Single-chain Arcs with linkers LL9-LL59 were purified for biophysical characterization. All of these single-chain proteins had CD and fluorescence spectra similar to wild-type Arc. Arc-LL11-Arc, Arc-LL19-Arc, and Arc-LL31-Arc were analyzed by analytical ultracentrifugation and found to be monomeric at concentrations between 10 and 100 M (data not shown). Proteins containing the three longest linkers (LL47, LL51, and LL59) tended to precipitate at concentrations Ͼ100 M, possibly because of aggregation caused by cross-folding of the Arc subunits.
The thermodynamic stabilities of Arc-LLX-Arc proteins with linkers from 9 to 57 residues were determined by urea denaturation studies, revealing that the 19-residue linker provides maximal stability. As shown in Fig. 2 for a subset of these proteins, there are large changes in the concentration of urea required for denaturation of proteins with different linker lengths, but the curves are roughly parallel indicating that the denaturant m-values (variation of ⌬G u with urea) are similar. Fig. 3B shows the variations of ⌬G u and C eff with linker length. For linkers from 9 to 19 residues, stability of the single-chain protein increased with length. Arc-L9-Arc was the least stable (⌬G u Ϸ 3 kcal͞mol; C eff Ϸ 6 M) and Arc-LL19-Arc was the most stable (⌬G u ϭ 8.4 kcal͞mol; C eff ϭ 80 mM) of the proteins examined. Increases in linker length past 19 residues resulted in decreasing stability until a plateau was reached at Ϸ4.5 kcal͞mol (C eff Ϸ 150 M) for linkers between 47 and 59 residues.
The linker-dependent changes in stability arise from changes in both the folding and unfolding rates, as measured in urea-jump, stopped-flow, kinetic experiments. Fig. 3 C and D show that both the folding and unfolding rate constants vary significantly as the linker length is changed. In 7 M urea, Arc-LL9-Arc unfolds with a rate constant (k u ) of Ϸ3,000 s for the Arc-LL13-Arc protein. Decreasing the linker by four residues to a length of nine causes a 30-fold decrease in the folding rate. As the linker length is increased from 13 to 47 residues, the refolding rate also decreases. Over this range, there is a roughly exponential decrease in k f that spans nearly four orders of magnitude. Little change in k f is seen for linkers between 47 and 59 residues. These results show that linker length can have large effects on the free energy difference between the denatured state and the transition state. Moreover, the length optima for equilibrium stability (19 residues), refolding (13 residues), and unfolding (19-59 residues) are different. The 19-residue linker provides the greatest equilibrium stability because it is the best compromise between reasonably fast refolding and slow unfolding.
Effects of Linker Composition. To asses the effects of varying the number of glycines in the linker, the length of the linker was fixed at 19 residues and 16 internal positions were randomized between Ala and Gly (ALX library) or between Ser and Gly (SLX library) by using the strategy described in Materials and Methods. For these experiments, the libraries were first selected for Arc repressor activity in vivo and then the sequences of individual members were determined. Sixteen proteins comprise the ALX library; the linkers in these proteins contain from 3 to 15 alanines (Fig. 4A) . Ten proteins, with 3-11 serines in the linker region, comprise the SLX library (Fig. 5A) . All of the Arc-ALX-Arc and Arc-SLX-Arc proteins were expressed at high levels, were purified, and had CD and fluorescence spectra similar to wild-type Arc. In the ALX library, variants with eight or more linker alanines showed some tendency to aggregate during purification and handling but were monomeric at concentrations of 1-20 M as judged by analytical ultracentrifugation and the concentration independence of equilibrium stability and refolding rates. All other proteins in the ALX and SLX libraries were highly soluble.
The number of non-glycine residues in the 19-residue linker has a significant effect on the equilibrium stability of proteins in both the ALX and SLX libraries, as determined by urea denaturation. In the ALX library (Fig. 4 A and B) , Arc-AL11-Arc, which contains 11 alanines and 5 glycines in the randomized portion of the linker, has the maximum stability (⌬G u Ϸ 11 kcal͞mol; C eff Ϸ 8 M). Arc-AL3-Arc, with 3 alanines and 13 glycines in the randomized region of the linker, is far less stable (⌬G u Ϸ 3 kcal͞mol; C eff Ϸ 10 M), suggesting that too much linker flexibility is detrimental to stability. Fig. 4B shows, however, that stability also decreases when the number of alanines is increased past the optimum value of 11, indicating that linkers that are too inflexible also limit protein stability. The same general trends are observed in the SLX library; proteins with too many or too few glycines are significantly less stable than Arc-SL7-Arc (⌬G u Ϸ 7 kcal͞mol; C eff Ϸ 7 mM). There are, however, two significant differences between the ALX and SLX results. Maximum stability occurs for a protein containing eight glycines in the randomized portion of the linker in the SLX library but for a protein containing only five glycines in this region in the ALX library. Moreover, the stabilities of the most stable variants in each library also differ significantly; Arc-AL11-Arc has an effective concentration that is 1,000-fold greater than Arc-SL7-Arc. We interpret these differences as indicating that the identity of the non-glycine residues in the linker is as important as the number of these residues in determining stability. By contrast, the positions of the glycine and non-glycine residues in the randomized portion of the linker seem to be unimportant. Five pairs of variants in the ALX library and three pairs in the SLX library have the same composition but difference sequences. In each of these cases, the stabilities of these variants (indicated by open and closed symbols in Figs. 4B and 5B) were found to be within experimental error.
Another significant difference between the ALX and SLX libraries is observed in the unfolding kinetics (Figs. 4D and  5D) . In the ALX library, the unfolding rate of different variants only changes by a factor of 20. In the SLX library, the unfolding rates change by Ͼ1,000-fold. In addition, the shapes of these plots are very different. The ALX data is concave upward with minimum occurring for the protein with seven alanines and eight glycines in the randomized portion of the linker. In the SLX library, by contrast, k u decrease exponentially with the number of serines. The rate constants for refolding in the ALX library change by more than five orders of magnitude, reaching a maximum for variants with 11 or 12 alanines in the randomized part of the linker (Fig. 5C ). Because changes in the unfolding rate are small for the ALX proteins, the changes in equilibrium stability arise almost exclusively from changes in the refolding rate. In the SLX library, variants differ over a 300-fold range in refolding rates with a maximum between four and seven serines. Because 
Colloquium Paper: Robinson and Sauer Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998) much larger changes are seen in the unfolding rates, the changes in equilibrium stability for the SLX proteins are dominated by the changes in unfolding kinetics. These results emphasize once again that the chemical identity of the nonglycine residues in the linker can have a profound effect on the biophysical properties of the single-chain proteins.
Linker length and composition exert a surprisingly large influence on the stability of single-chain Arc repressor. In the LLX linker length library, the most stable protein has a linker of 19 residues, and adding or deleting a few amino acids decreases stability (Fig. 3B) . These length effects on stability arise from changes in the folding and unfolding rates. In the regime from 59 to 13 residues, shortening the linker accelerates folding. This observation is explained most simply if the denatured subunit domains are constrained to smaller and smaller regions of conformation space by shorter linkers and thus require less random sampling before essential collisions required for folding occur. We note, however, that the length dependence of the stability of single-chain Arc variants in this regime is significantly steeper than for loop-length variants of single-chain Rop (29) and is modeled poorly by simple, random walk, entropic considerations (30) . As the linker length decreases from 13 to 11 to 9 residues, there is a decrease in the folding rate of the corresponding Arc-LLX-Arc protein. At some point, the linkers must become too short to connect the subunits in the native conformation without strain. In fact, in the linker length regime from 19 to 9 residues, the unfolding rates of the corresponding Arc-LLX-Arc proteins increases exponentially as the linkers become shorter, suggesting that shorter tethers in this length range introduce more and more strain into the native structure. Presumably, proteins with the LL17, LL15, and LL13 linkers do not show decreased folding rates because of compensating changes in conformational search efficiency. Glycine is generally used in designed linkers because the absence of a ␤-carbon permits the polypeptide backbone to access dihedral angles that are energetically forbidden for other amino acids (31) . Thus, a glycine-rich linker will be more flexible than a linker of comparable length composed of non-glycine residues. Our results, however, indicate that too much linker flexibility is detrimental to single-chain protein stability. In the ALX (alanine͞glycine) library, maximum stability was observed when the 16-residue-randomized region contained 11 alanines and 5 glycines. In the SLX (serine͞ glycine) library, the most stable protein had seven serines and nine glycines in the randomized portion of the linker. In both libraries, plots of stability vs, the number of non-glycine residues are relatively regular and proteins with the same linker compositions have comparable stabilities (Figs. 4B and 5B). Both observations suggest that it is the composition rather than the sequence of the linker that is important in determining stability. A single exception to this generalization is provided by Arc-LL19-Arc and Arc-SL3-Arc, which have the same composition but stabilities differing by 3.4 kcal͞mol. The first three residues of the linker are Gly-Thr-Ser in Arc-SL3-Arc, which has lower stability, and Gly-Gly-Gly in Arc-LL19-Arc, suggesting that the conformational flexibility imparted by glycine may be important at the junction between C terminus of the first subunit and the N terminus of the linker.
In the ALX library, the main effects of alanine composition on stability result from changes in the refolding rate. For example, as the number of alanines in the linker increases from 3 to 11, the folding rates of the corresponding proteins increase by 30,000-fold. Alanine restricts the number of allowed conformations of the linker compared with glycine and, in this length regime, probably accelerates the conformational search that occurs during folding. Increasing the number of alanines to 14 or 15 then reduces the folding rate, probably because these linkers become too inflexible. When serine is substituted for glycine, there are also effects on the refolding rate but with several differences: the optimal number of serines is smaller than the optimal number of alanines (7 Ser vs. 11 Ala), the difference between the fastest and slowest folders are smaller (Ϸ2,000-fold for SLX vs, Ϸ30,000-fold for ALX), and the maximum folding rates are different (in 2.25 M urea, the fastest ALX protein folds Ϸ250 times faster than the fastest SLX protein). Clearly, alanine and serine affect linker flexibility in rather different ways.
Large differences between alanine and serine are also apparent when comparing effects on the unfolding rate. As the number of serines in the linker increases, the unfolding rate continues to decrease over a 5,000-fold range (Fig. 5D) . By contrast, in the alanine library, the minimum unfolding rate is observed for a protein with seven alanines and the total change between the slowest and fastest unfolders is only 15-fold. We presume that the ability of serine to form hydrogen bonds allows formation of new stabilizing interactions in the native state but whether these interactions are within the linker or involve interactions between the linker and the body of the single-chain protein is unknown. Because alanines in the linker primarily affect folding rates whereas serine has the largest effects on unfolding rates, it seems possible that optimizing the composition of Gly, Ser, and Ala in a linker library might produce single-chain molecules with even greater stabilities than those described here. Preliminary studies also suggest that the effects of length and composition may be interdependent. For example, linkers of different lengths may have different optimal compositions.
Variations in linker length or composition caused no significant changes in repressor activity in vivo except in proteins with linkers shorter than 11 residues. In gel mobility-shift assays, Arc-LL19-Arc and Arc-LA11-Arc, which have 19-residue linkers, bound operator DNA as strongly as wild-type Arc dimers (data not shown). In earlier work, however, we found that Arc-L1-Arc (which is identical to Arc-LL15-Arc) had a 10-fold enhanced affinity for operator DNA (9, 26) . In single-chain Arc, the linker connects the N-terminal arm of the second subunit to the C terminus of the first subunit; in wild-type Arc, this N-terminal arm is disordered in solution (32) but folds against the operator in the protein-DNA complex (33) . The L1͞LL15 linker may increase operator affinity by helping to restrict the conformation of the arm in solution, thereby reducing the entropic penalty for ordering the arm upon DNA binding (9) . By this model, lengthening the linker to 19 residues probably reduces constraints on the arm conformation.
In summary, we find that changes in linker length and composition can produce substantial changes in the stability and folding kinetics of single-chain Arc. Poly-glycine linkers maximize the conformational freedom of the polypeptide backbone but do not result in optimal stability. For singlechain or hybrid protein designs that have folding problems, alterations in linker length and͞or composition should provide a useful method for increasing stability.
Analyzing an input-output relationship from samples is one of the central challenges in machine learning. The most common approach is regression, which estimates the conditional mean of output y given input x. However, just analyzing the conditional mean is not informative enough, when the conditional density p(y|x) possesses multimodality, asymmetry, and heteroskedasticity (i.e., input-dependent variance) as a function of output y. In such cases, it would be more appropriate to estimate the conditional density itself (see Figure 2 ). The most naive approach to conditional density estimation (CDE) would be -neighbor kernel density estimation ( -KDE) , which performs standard KDE along y only with nearby samples in the input domain. However, -KDE does not work well in high-dimensional problems because the number of nearby samples is too few. To avoid the small sample problem, KDE may be applied twice to estimate p(x, y) and p(x) separately and the estimated densities may be plugged into the decomposed form p(y|x) = p(x, y)/p(x) to estimate the conditional density. However, taking the ratio of two estimated densities significantly magnifies the estimation error and thus is not reliable. To overcome this problem, an approach to directly estimating the density ratio p(x, y)/p(x) without separate estimation of densities p(x, y) and p(x) has been explored (Sugiyama et al., 2010) . This method, called least-squares CDE (LSCDE), was proved to possess the optimal nonparametric learning rate in the mini-max sense, and its solution can be efficiently and analytically computed. Nevertheless, estimating conditional densities in high-dimensional problems is still challenging.
A natural idea to cope with the high dimensionality is to perform dimensionality reduction (DR) before CDE. Sufficient DR (Li, 1991; Cook & Ni, 2005 ) is a framework of supervised DR aimed at finding the subspace of input x that contains all information on output y, and a method based on conditional-covariance operators in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces has been proposed (Fukumizu, Bach, & Jordan, 2009) . Although this method possesses superior theoretical properties, it is not easy to use in practice because no systematic model selection method is available for kernel parameters. To overcome this problem, an alternative sufficient DR method based on squared-loss mutual information (SMI) has been proposed recently (Suzuki & Sugiyama, 2013) . This method involves nonparametric estimation of SMI that is theoretically guaranteed to achieve the optimal estimation rate, and all tuning parameters can be systematically chosen in practice by cross-validation with respect to the SMI approximation error.
Given such state-of-the-art DR methods, performing DR before LSCDE would be a promising approach to improving the accuracy of CDE in highdimensional problems. However, such a two-step approach is not preferable because DR in the first step is performed without regard to CDE in the second step, and thus small errors incurred in the DR step can be significantly magnified in the CDE step.
In this letter, we propose a single-shot method that integrates DR and CDE. Our key idea is to formulate the sufficient DR problem in terms of the squared-loss conditional entropy (SCE), which includes the conditional density in its definition, and LSCDE is executed when DR is performed. Therefore, when DR is completed, the final conditional density estimator has already been obtained without an additional CDE step (see Figure 1 ). We demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed method, named least-squares conditional entropy (LSCE), through experiments on benchmark data sets, humanoid robot control simulations, and computer art. 
In this section, we describe our proposed method for conditional density estimation with dimensionality reduction.
be the input and output domains with dimensionality d x and d y , respectively, and let p(x, y) be a joint probability density on D x × D y . Assume that we are given n independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) training samples from the joint density:
The goal is to estimate the conditional density p(y|x) from the samples. Our implicit assumption is that the input dimensionality d x is large, but its intrinsic dimensionality, denoted by d z , is rather small. More specifically, let W and
is an orthogonal matrix. Then we assume that x can be decomposed into the component z = W x and its perpendicular component z ⊥ = W ⊥ x so that y and x are conditionally independent given z: y ⊥ x|z.
(2.1)
This means that z is the relevant part of x, and the rest z ⊥ does not contain any information on y. The problem of finding W is called sufficient dimensionality reduction (Li, 1991; Cook & Ni, 2005) .
Let us consider a squared-loss variant of conditional entropy, squared-loss CE (SCE):
By expanding the squared term in equation 2.2, we obtain
Then we have the following theorem (its proof is given in appendix A), which forms the basis of our proposed method:
This theorem shows SCE(Y |Z) ≥ SCE(Y |X ), and the equality holds if and only if
This is equivalent to the conditional independence, equation 2.1, and therefore sufficient dimensionality reduction can be performed by minimizing SCE(Y |Z) with respect to W :
(2.5)
(R) denotes the Grassmann manifold, which is a set of orthogonal matrices without overlaps,
where I denotes the identity matrix and ∼ represents the equivalence relation: W and W are written as W ∼ W if their rows span the same subspace.
Since p(y|z) = p(z, y)/p(z), SCE(Y |Z) is equivalent to the negative Pearson divergence (Pearson, 1900) from p(z, y) to p(z), which is a member of the f-divergence class (Ali & Silvey, 1966; Csiszár, 1967) with the squaredloss function. Ordinary conditional entropy (CE), defined by
is the negative Kullback-Leibler divergence (Kullback & Leibler, 1951) from p(z, y) to p(z). Since the Kullback-Leibler divergence is also a member of the f-divergence class (with the log-loss function), CE and SCE have similar properties. Indeed, theorem 1 also holds for ordinary CE. However, the Pearson divergence is shown to be more robust against outliers (Basu, Harris, Hjort, & Jones, 1998; Sugiyama, Suzuki, & Kanamori, 2012) , since the log function, is very sharp near zero, is not included. Furthermore, as we show, SCE can be approximated analytically, and thus its derivative can also be easily computed. This is a critical property for developing a dimensionality-reduction method because we want to minimize SCE with respect to W , where the gradient is highly useful in devising an optimization algorithm. For this reason, we adopt SCE instead of CE below.
Since SCE(Y |Z) in equation 2.5 is unknown in practice, we approximate it using samples
(2.6)
If we set a = p(y|z), we have
If we multiply both sides of the above inequality with −p(z) and integrate over z and y, we have
where minimization with respect to b is now performed as a function of z and y. (For more general discussions on divergence bounding, see Keziou, 2003, and Nguyen, Wainwright, & Jordan, 2010) . Let us consider a linear-in-parameter model for b:
where α is a parameter vector and ϕ(z, y) is a vector of basis functions. If the expectations over densities p(z) and p(z, y) are approximated by sample averages and the 2 -regularizer λα α/2 (λ ≥ 0) is included, the above minimization problem yields
The solution α is analytically given by
which yields b(z, y) = α ϕ(z, y). Then, from equation 2.7, we obtain an approximator of SCE(Y |Z) analytically as
We call this method least-squares conditional entropy (LSCE).
The SCE approximator depends on the choice of models-i.e., the basis function ϕ(z, y) and the regularization parameter λ. Such a model can be objectively selected by cross-validation as follows:
ii. Evaluate the upper bound of SCE obtained by b (M, j) using the hold-out data S j :
where |S j | denotes the cardinality of S j . b. The average score is computed as
3. The model that minimizes the average score is chosen:
4. For the chosen model M, the LSCE solution b is computed from all samples S, and the approximator SCE(Y |Z) is computed.
In the experiments, we use K = 5.
Reduction with SCE. Now we solve the following optimization problem by gradient descent:
(2.9)
As shown in appendix B, the gradient of SCE(Y |Z = W X ) is given by
In the Euclidean space, the above gradient gives the steepest direction. However, on a manifold, the natural gradient (Amari, 1998) gives the steepest direction.
The natural gradient ∇ SCE(W ) at W is the projection of the ordinary
is equipped with the canonical metric W , W = 1 2 tr(W W ), the natural gradient is given as follows (Edelman, Arias, & Smith, 1998) :
Then the geodesic from W to the direction of the natural gradient ∇ SCE
where "exp" for a matrix denotes the matrix exponential and O d,d denotes the d × d zero matrix. Note that the derivative ∂ t W t at t = 0 coincides with the natural gradient ∇ SCE (see Edelman et al., 1998, for details) . Thus, line search along the geodesic in the natural gradient direction is equivalent to finding the minimizer from {W t |t ≥ 0}. Once W is updated, SCE is reestimated with the new W , and gradient descent is performed again. This entire procedure is repeated until W converges. When SCE is reestimated, performing cross-validation in every step is computationally expensive. In our implementation, we perform cross-validation only once every five gradient updates. Furthermore, to find a better local optimal solution, this gradient descent procedure is executed 20 times with randomly chosen initial solutions; the one achieving the smallest value of SCE is chosen.
Since the maximum of equation 2.6 is attained at b = a and a = p(y|z) in the current derivation, the optimal b(z, y) is actually the conditional density p(y|z) itself. Therefore, α ϕ(z, y) obtained by LSCE is a conditional density estimator. This implies that the upper-bound minimization procedure described in section 2.3 is equivalent to least-squares conditional density estimation (LSCDE) (Sugiyama et al., 2010) , which minimizes the squared error:
Then, in the same way as the original LSCDE, we may postprocess the solution α to make the conditional density estimator nonnegative and normalized as
where α l = max α l , 0 . Note that even if the solution is postprocessed as equation 2.10, the optimal estimation rate of the LSCDE solution is still maintained (Sugiyama et al., 2010) .
In practice, we use the following gaussian function as the kth basis:
where (u k , v k ) denotes the kth gaussian center located at (z k , y k ). When the sample size n is too large, we may use only a subset of samples as gaussian centers. σ denotes the gaussian bandwidth, which is chosen by cross-validation, as explained in section 2.4. We may use different bandwidths for z and y, but this will increase the computation time for model selection. In our implementation, we normalize each element of z and y to have the unit variance in advance and then use the common bandwidth for z and y.
A notable advantage of using the gaussian function is that the integral over y appeared in¯ (z) (see equation 2.8) can be computed analytically as
Similarly, the normalization term in equation 2.10 can also be computed analytically as
2.8 Discussion. We have proposed minimizing SCE for dimensionality reduction:
In previous work Suzuki and Sugiyama (2013) , squared-loss mutual information (SMI) was maximized for dimensionality reduction:
This shows that the essential difference is whether p(y) is included in the denominator of the density ratio. Thus, if p(y) is uniform, the proposed dimensionality-reduction method using SCE is reduced to the existing method using SMI. However, if p(y) is not uniform, the density ratio function p(z,y) p(z)p(y) included in SMI may be more fluctuated than p(z,y) p(z) included in SCE. Since a smoother function can be more accurately estimated from a small number of samples in general, the proposed method using SCE is expected to work better than the existing method using SMI. We will experimentally demonstrate this effect in section 3.
Sufficient dimension reduction based on the conditional density p(y|z) has also been studied in the statistics literature. The density-minimum average variance estimation (dMAVE) method (Xia, 2007) finds a dimensionreduction subspace using local linear regression for the conditional density in a semi-parametric manner. A similar approach has also been taken in the sliced regression for dimension reduction method (Wang & Xia, 2008) , where the cumulative conditional density is used instead of the conditional density. A Bayesian approach to sufficient dimension reduction called the Bayesian dimension reduction (BDR) method (Reich, Bondell, & Li, 2011) has been proposed recently. This method models the conditional density as a gaussian mixture model and obtains a dimension-reduction subspace through sampling from the learned prior distribution of low-dimensional input. These methods have been shown to work well for dimension reduction in real-world data sets, although they are applicable only to univariate output data where d y = 1.
In regression, learning with the squared loss is not robust against outliers (Huber, 1981) . However, density estimation (Basu et al., 1998) and density ratio estimation under the Pearson divergence are known to be robust against outliers. Thus, in the same sense, the proposed LSCE estimator would also be robust against outliers. We experimentally investigate the robustness in section 3.
In this section, we experimentally investigate the practical usefulness of the proposed method. We consider the following dimensionality-reduction schemes:
None: No dimensionality reduction is performed. dMAVE: The density-minimum average variance estimation method where dimension reduction is performed through local linear regression for the conditional density (Xia, 2007) . 1 BDR: The Bayesian dimension-reduction method where the conditional density is modeled by a gaussian mixture model and dimension reduction is performed by sampling from the prior distribution of low-dimensional input (Reich et al., 2011) . 2 LSMI: Dimension reduction is performed by maximizing an SMI approximator called least-squares MI (LSMI) using natural gradients over the Grassmann manifold (Suzuki & Sugiyama, 2013) . LSCE (proposed): Dimension reduction is performed by minimizing the proposed LSCE using natural gradients over the Grassmann manifold. True (reference): The "true" subspace is used (only for artificial data).
After dimension reduction, we execute the following conditional density estimators:
-KDE: -neighbor kernel density estimation, where is chosen by leastsquares cross-validation. LSCDE: Least-squares conditional density estimation (Sugiyama et al., 2010) .
Note that the proposed method, which is the combination of LSCE and LSCDE, does not explicitly require the post-LSCDE step because LSCDE is executed inside LSCE. Since the dMAVE and BDR methods are applicable only to univariate output, they are not included in experiments with multivariate output data.
3.1 Illustration. First, we illustrate the behavior of the plain LSCDE (None/LSCDE) and the proposed method (LSCE/LSCDE). The data sets illustrated in Figure 2 have d x = 5, d y = 1, and d z = 1. The first dimension of input x and output y of the samples is plotted in the graphs, and the other four dimensions of x are just standard normal noise. The results show that the plain LSCDE does not perform well due to the irrelevant noise dimensions of x, while the proposed method gives much better estimates.
Next, we compare the proposed method with the existing dimensionality-reduction methods on conditional density estimation by LSCDE in artificial data sets.
For d x = 5, d y = 1, x ∼ N (x|0, I 5 ), and ∼ N ( |0, 0.25 2 ), where N (·|μ, ) denotes the normal distribution with mean μ and covariance matrix , we consider the following artificial data sets: a. d z = 2 and y = (x (1) ) 2 + (x (2) ) 2 + . b. d z = 1 and y = x (2) + (x (2) ) 2 + (x (2) ) 3 + . c. d z = 1 and y = (x (1) ) 2 + with 0.85 probability, 2 − 4 with 0.15 probability. The first row of Figure 3 shows the dimensionality-reduction error between true W * and its estimate W for different sample size n, measured by
where · Frobenius denotes the Frobenius norm. All methods perform similarly for data set a, and the dMAVE and BDR methods outperform LSCE and LSMI when n = 50. In data set b, LSMI does not work well compared to other methods especially when n ≥ 250. To explain this behavior, we plot the histograms of {y} 400 i=1 in the left column of Figure 4 . They show that the profile of the histogram (a sample approximation of p(y)) in data set b is much sharper than that in data set a. As discussed in section 2.8, the density ratio (y) . For data set c we consider the situation where {y i } n i=1 contain outliers that are not related to x. The data profile of data set c in the right column of Figure 4 illustrates such a situation. The result on data set c shows that the proposed LSCE method is robust against outliers and gives the best subspace estimation accuracy, while the BDR method performs unreliably with large standard errors.
The right column of Figure 3 plots the conditional density estimation error between true p(y|x) and its estimate p(y|x), evaluated by the squared loss:
is a set of test samples that have not been used for training. We set n = 1000. For data sets a and c, all methods with dimension reduction perform equally well, which is much better than no dimension reduction (None/LSCDE) and is comparable to the method with the true subspace (True/LSCDE). For data set b, all methods except LSMI/LSCDE perform well overall and are comparable to the methods with the true subspace.
Next, we use the UCI benchmark data sets (Bache & Lichman, 2013) . We randomly select n samples from each data set for training, and the rest are used to measure the conditional density estimation error in the test phase. Since the dimensionality of the subspace d z is unknown, we chose it by cross-validation. More specifically, five-fold cross-validation is performed for each combination of the dimensionalityreduction and conditional-density estimation methods to choose subspace dimensionalities d z such that the conditional-density estimation error is minimized. Note that tuning parameters λ and σ are also chosen based on cross-validation for each method. Since the conditional-density estimation error is equivalent to SCE, choosing the subspace dimensionalities by the conditional-density estimation error in LSCE is equivalent to choosing subspace dimensionalities that give the minimum SCE value.
The results of univariate output benchmark data sets averaged over 10 runs are summarized in the subspace dimensionalities chosen by cross-validation averaged over 10 runs. It shows that all dimensionality-reduction methods reduce the input dimension significantly, especially for Yacht, Red Wine, and White Wine, where the best method always chooses d z = 1 in all runs.
The results of multivariate output Stock and Energy benchmark data sets are summarized in Table 3 , showing that the proposed LSCE/LSCDE method also works well for multivariate output data sets and significantly outperforms methods without dimensionality reduction. Table 4 describes the subspace dimensionalities selected by cross-validation, showing that LSMI/LSCDE tends to more aggressively reduce the dimensionality than LSCE/LSCDE.
We evaluate the performance of the proposed method on humanoid robot transition estimation. We use a simulator of the upper-body part of the humanoid robot CB-i (Cheng et al., 2007;  see Figure 5 ). The robot has nine controllable joints: shoulder pitch, shoulder roll, elbow pitch of the right arm, shoulder pitch, shoulder roll, elbow pitch of the left arm, waist yaw, torso roll, and torso pitch joints.
The posture of the robot is described by 18-dimensional real-valued state vector s, which corresponds to the angle and angular velocity of each joint in radians and radians per seconds, respectively. We can control the robot by sending the action command a to the system. The action command a is a nine-dimensional real-valued vector that corresponds to the target angle of each joint. When the robot is at state s and receives action a, the physical control system of the simulator calculates the amount of torque to be applied to each joint. These torques are calculated by the proportional-derivative (PD) controller as
where s i ,ṡ i , and a i denote the current angle, the current angular velocity, and the received target angle of the ith joint, respectively. K p i and K d i denote the position and velocity gains for the ith joint, respectively. We set K p i = 2000 and K d i = 100 for all joints except K p i = 200 and K d i = 10 for the elbow pitch joints. After the torques are applied to the joints, the physical control system updates the state of the robot to s .
In the experiment, we randomly choose the action vector a and simulate a noisy control system by adding a bimodal gaussian noise vector. More specifically, the action a i of the ith joint is first drawn from uniform distribution on [s i − 0.087, s i + 0.087]. The drawn action is then contaminated by gaussian noise with mean 0 and standard deviation 0.034 with probability 0.6 and gaussian noise with mean −0.087 and standard deviation 0.034 with probability 0.4. By repeatedly controlling the robot n times, we obtain the transition samples {(s j , a j , s j )} n j=1 . Our goal is to learn the (Sutton & Barto, 1998) . We consider three scenarios: using only two joints (right shoulder pitch and right elbow pitch), only four joints (in addition, right shoulder roll and waist yaw), and all nine joints. Thus, d x = 6 and d y = 4 for the two-joint case, d x = 12 and d y = 8 for the four-joint case, and d x = 27 and d y = 18 for the nine-joint case. We generate 500, 1000, and 1500 transition samples for the two-joint, four-joint, and nine-joint cases. We then randomly choose n = 100, 200, and 500 samples for training, and use the rest for evaluating the test error. The results are summarized also in Table 3 , showing that the proposed method performs well for all three cases. Table 4 describes the Figure 6 : Three actions of the brush, which is modeled as the footprint on a paper canvas. dimensionalities selected by cross-validation, showing that the humanoid robot's transition is highly redundant.
Finally, we consider the transition estimation problem in sumi-e style brush drawings for nonphotorealistic rendering (Xie, Hachiya, & Sugiyama, 2012) . Our aim is to learn the brush dynamics as state transition probability p(s |s, a) from the real artists' stroke-drawing samples.
From a video of real brushstrokes, we extract footprints and identify corresponding three-dimensional actions (see Figure 6 ). The state vector consists of six measurements: the angle of the velocity vector and the heading direction of the footprint relative to the medial axis of the drawing shape, the ratio of the offset distance from the center of the footprint to the nearest point on the medial axis over the radius of the footprint, the relative curvatures of the nearest current point and the next point on the medial axis, and the binary signal of the reverse driving or not. Thus, the state transition probability p(s |s, a) has nine-dimensional input and six-dimensional output. We collect 722 transition samples. We randomly choose n = 200, 250, and 300 for training and use the rest for testing.
The estimation results are summarized at the bottom of Tables 3 and 4 . These tables show that there exists a low-dimensional sufficient subspace and the proposed method can find it.
We proposed a new method for conditional-density estimation in highdimension problems. The key idea of the proposed method is to perform sufficient dimensionality reduction by minimizing the square-loss conditional entropy (SCE), which can be estimated by least-squares conditional-density estimation. Thus, dimensionality-reduction and conditional-density estimation are carried out simultaneously in an integrated manner.
We have shown that SCE and the squared-loss mutual information (SMI) are similar but different in that the output density is included in the denominator of the density ratio in SMI. This means that estimation of SMI is hard when the output density is fluctuated, while the proposed method using SCE does not suffer from this problem. The proposed method is also robust against outliers since minimization of the Pearson divergence automatically weighs down the effects of outlier points. Moreover, the proposed method is applicable to multivariate output data, which is not straightforward to handle in other dimensionality-reduction methods based on conditional probability density. The effectiveness of the proposed method was demonstrated through extensive experiments, including humanoid robot transition and computer art. Using ∂X −1 ∂ h k ∂W l,l = − 1 σ 2 n n i=1 ϕ k (z i , y i ) ((z (l) i − u (l) k )(x (l ) i −ũ (l ) k )).
Breast cancer is among the most common cancers worldwide and is the second leading cause of cancer death for women in the United States, aer lung cancer, with an estimated incidence of 226,870 cases and estimated deaths of 39, 510 cases in the year of 2012. e National Cancer Institute also estimated that 1 in 8 women in the United States has the chance of developing invasive breast cancer throughout her lifetime [1, 2] . Diabetes is also a very common chronic health problem where it is currently estimated that 10% of women in the United States over the age of 20 have type 2 diabetes. Prevalence of diabetes has steadily increased since 1990. e 2010 CDC study projected that by 2050, as many as one of three US adults could have diabetes if the current trend continues [3, 4] . Association between diabetes and breast cancer has been noted where 16% of older breast cancer patients were found to suffer from diabetes, and this might have important public health implications.
Different mechanisms contribute to the association between diabetes and breast cancer. Diabetes induces several changes in different hormonal systems including insulin, insulin-like growth factors, estrogen, and other growth factors, all of which may affect the risk for breast cancer development. As shown in Figure 1 , type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated with insulin resistance, in�ammation with increased in�ammatory markers such as Interleukin 6 and increased reactive oxygen species with all of which being related to high insulin level, which in turn activates the insulin receptor, which is a tyrosine kinase receptor, expressed in skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, liver, and other tissues including normal breast tissue. Insulin receptor, once activated, will phosphorylate a number of intracellular proteins, leading to the activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) cascade, one of the mitogen-activating protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, which increases mitogenesis and breast cancer risk. Insulin also suppresses IGF binding protein-1, thus increasing bioavailable IGF-1. Diabetes is also associated with decreased adiponectin plasma levels, which inhibits the AMP kinase (AMPK) and thus activates the ERK and Akt pathways leading to increased breast cancer risk [5, 6] .
With regards to the complex association between type 2 diabetes and incidence of breast cancer, several prospective and case-control studies reported increased risk ratios for breast cancer among women with type 2 diabetes [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] . However, other studies found no association [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] . It is important to note that the above studies included small sample size, did not include potential confounders, and were underpowered to look at the real association. One of those studies, however, which was the Iowa Women's Study did adjust for BMI and waist-to-hip ratio and did not reveal an overall association between type 2 diabetes and breast cancer incidence [23] . e Nurses' Health Study, provided the largest population, had the longest followup that included a total of 116,488 female nurses, whose ages were 30-55 years old and who were free of cancer in 1976, and then followed up through 1996 for the occurrence of type 2 diabetes and through 1998 for the occurrence of incident invasive breast cancer, as veri�ed by medical records and pathology reports. Women with type 2 diabetes were found to have a modestly elevated incidence of breast cancer (hazard ratio of 
A cohort study within the UK General Practice Research Database found that diabetes was associated with 29% increased breast cancer risk (95% CI: 1.16-1.44), but the association was markedly attenuated when adjusted for age, region, and body mass index (BMI) (HR: 1.12; 95% CI: 0.98-1.29). is cohort also showed that women with breast cancer who had preexisting diabetes had an overall increased mortality of 49%, (95% CI: 1.17-1.88), as compared to breast cancer without diabetes and this persisted even aer controlling for age, period, region, BMI, smoking, alcohol, and deprivation [30] . In another study, including 4,390 Asian patients with breast cancer, of which 341 (7.7%) presented with DM, the 5-year breast cancer survival and overall survival was signi�cantly lower diabetics as compared to nondiabetics (BCS, 85% versus 91%; OS, 79% versus 90%), respectively. is persisted even aer adjusting for all clinical variables and comorbidities [31] . In a retrospective study, including breast cancer patients who had undergone mastectomy and completed adjuvant chemotherapy from 1998 to 2010, median disease-free survival was found to be 81 months (95% CI, 61.6-100.4) in nondiabetic patients and 36 months (95% CI, 13.6-58.4) in diabetic patients ( ) [32] . On the other hand, in a retrospective analysis of 265 patients with advanced breast cancer, no difference in overall survival was observed between the diabetic and nondiabetic patients, but this study showed that the overall survival was greater in diabetic patients who had proper metabolic control as compared to those with poor metabolic control [33] . Moreover, in the Fremantle Diabetes Study (FDS), which was a community-based longitudinal observational study of 1426 subjects, 1294 of which had type 2 diabetes, it was found that diabetic men and women had similar risks of prostate and breast cancer like those of controls [34] .
A recent meta-analysis showed that the relative risk for breast cancer in women with diabetes was 1.27 (95% con�-dence interval (CI), 1. [36] .
In a recent review of the association of diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and breast cancer risk, included were 26 studies, of which 10 were case-control studies, 3 of which directly looked at the association of diabetes and breast cancer [20, 37, 38] , 14 were cohort studies [26, [39] [40] [41] [42] , 5 of which looked at the above association, and 2 were cross-sectional studies [43, 44] . is paper supported a modest association between type 2 diabetes and the risk of breast cancer, which appears to be more consistent among postmenopausal as compared to premenopausal women. It was proposed in this review that hyperinsulinemic state would suppress SHBG, hence increasing free available estrogen concentrations. In addition, IGF-I stimulates the production of androgens in the ovarian stroma, which displaces estrogens from SHBG. ey also added that estradiol alters the expression of many components of the IGF-I system; where the ligand-bound estrogen receptor binds to and activates IGF-1R directly and as a result IGF-I signaling enhances estrogen receptor activation leading to the phosphorylation of the estrogen receptor. is leads to IGF-I and estrogen having a synergistic effects leading to proliferation and increasing breast cancer risk in the presence of the hyperinsulinemic state of type 2 diabetes [45, 46] .

Several observational studies suggested that metformin use decreases the incidence of several cancers overall [47] [48] [49] [50] . For example, Evans and colleagues [47] reported a decreased risk of breast cancer in diabetics receiving metformin (versus those patients not on metformin), with the protective effect increasing with the increase in metformin exposure. However, �nd-ings regarding breast cancer and metformin use have been mixed. A recent meta-analysis which included seven independent observational studies supported a protective effect of metformin on breast cancer risk among postmenopausal women with diabetes (OR was 0.83). Stronger associations were noted with longer metformin use [51] . In addition, in the cohort study within the UK General Practice Research Database, it was found that metformin monotherapy had weaker association with breast cancer risk with a hazard ratio of 1.04 (95% CI: 0.79-1.37) as compared to sulfonylurea and insulin where the latter were more associated with breast cancer risk (HR: 1.33; 95% CI: 0.63-2.83) [30] . A case-control study also demonstrated a decreased risk of breast cancer in women who took metformin for several years as compared to short-term users [52] . Moreover, a nested case-control study of the Danish medical registry included 4323 type 2 diabetic perimenopausal or postmenopausal women and showed that those who used metformin for at least 1 year were less likely to be diagnosed with breast cancer as compared to those who did not use metformin. Moreover this association was not altered even aer adjustment for obesity, diabetes complications, and other predictors of breast cancer [53] .
As for the proposed protective effect of metformin, it is well known that metformin acts by increasing glucose uptake by skeletal muscle and thus reducing hyperglycemia by improving insulin sensitivity through the stimulation of the adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), leading to the suppression of gluconeogenesis, protein, and fatty acid synthesis resulting in partial metabolic normalization of hyperglycemia and insulin resistance [54, 55] . Stimulation of the AMPK inhibits mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)/ribosomal S6 kinase pathway. is would inhibit pathological cell cycle progression, cell growth, and angiogenesis [56, 57] . Moreover stimulation of AMPK by metformin led to decrease cell proliferation in both estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha) negative and positive human breast cancer cell lines, in addition to the inhibition of aromatase expression in human breast adipose stromal cells [58, 59] . In vitro studies have also shown that metformin use reduces the proliferation of breast cancer cells [60] . e role of metformin as anti-breast cancer agent has also been attributed to its effect on immune system but this has to be further looked at in more details [61] .
Recently, an epidemiological study of 2,529 women with breast cancer reported higher pathologic complete response in diabetic patients on neoadjuvant systemic therapy and receiving metformin (pCR 24%) as compared to diabetic patients not receiving metformin (pCR 8%) and nondiabetic patients not receiving metformin (pCR 16%) [62] . However metformin failed to signi�cantly improve the estimated 3-year relapse-free survival rate in this study. Some prospective clinical trials have been completed in nondiabetic patients who received low doses of metformin (250 mg/day) and showed a reduction in the proliferative activity of colonic epithelium [63] . is led to ongoing studies involving neoadjuvant metformin treatment of newly diagnosed breast cancer patients, which have also demonstrated that metformin has favorable effects on tumor cell proliferation and apoptosis [64, 65] .
A currently ongoing phase III trial of metformin versus placebo in early-stage breast cancer, where nondiabetic women or men, younger than age 75 with newly diagnosed early-stage breast cancer, within the previous 12 months, and following their surgery to remove their tumor, will be randomly assigned to take metformin or placebo pills twice a day for 5 years. Participants in the trial may also receive adjuvant hormone and/or radiation therapy, but if chemotherapy (adjuvant or neoadjuvant) was given, it must have been completed prior to joining the study. is study will mainly monitor to see if metformin would improve disease-free survival, overall survival, and a number of other medical, biological, and quality-of-life endpoints [66] .
Other 6 ongoing studies are currently done evaluating the efficacy and safety of treating cancer patients with the metformin. e European Institute of Oncology in Italy is currently planning a presurgical randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase II trial in which 100 histologically con�rmed that breast cancer patients not suitable for neoadjuvant therapy will be assigned randomly to either metformin (850 mg twice/daily or placebo until surgery with the aim of evaluating the activity of metformin on Ki67-measured tumor proliferation [67] . Also in Italy, two randomized clinical trial, one of them is the Plotina plan, aim to evaluate the effect of metformin on breast cancer as primary prevention in around 16,000 postmenopausal women, aged 45-74 years, where patients are being randomly assigned to the metformin treatment or placebo, and histologically con�rmed invasive breast cancer diagnosed aer recruitment to the trial (date at interview) and before the end of the last follow-up period. e results of the two trials will clarify the role of metformin as a chemopreventive agent [68] .
Another phase II, randomized, open-label, multicentric clinical trial wants to evaluate HER2-related bene�ts of metformin as neoadjuvant chemotherapy with chemotherapy and trastuzumab in women diagnosed with HER2-positive primary breast cancer with the assessment of its effect on a 3-year disease free survival [69] .
Cancer. ree nested casecontrol studies, included 513 breast cancer patients as compared to 2557 controls, were used to evaluate the risk of breast, colon, and prostate cancers developing in patients exposed to thiazolidinediones (TZDs) as compared with other antidiabetic agents and they showed a neutral effect of TZDs on the likelihood of the development of cancers including colon, prostate, and breast cancers [70] .
e therapeutic effects of troglitazone, in patients with refractory metastatic breast cancer to at least one chemotherapy regimen (ER negative tumors) or two hormonal regimens (ER positive tumors), were evaluated before it was withdrawn from the market following FDA warnings on hepatic toxicity. No objective responses were observed and it was found to have little apparent clinical value among patients with treatment-refractory metastatic breast cancer [71] . In a study of 1983 consecutive patients with HER2+ breast cancer treated between January 1 1998 and September 30 2010, it was shown that metformin ( , HR = 0.52, 95% CI 0.28-0.97) and thiazolidinediones ( ; HR = 0.41, 95% CI 0.18-0.93) signi�cantly lengthened survival and decreased breast cancer-speci�c mortality ( 2 , HR = 0.47, 95% CI 0.24-0.90 and , HR = 0.42, 95% CI 0.18-0.98, resp.) [72] . It was proposed that thiazolenediones has a protective role decreasing breast cancer risk through downregulating Wnt/Catenin Signaling, hence targeting abnormal breast cancer cells directly [73] .
Cancer. In a recent review, it was found that the �rst and second generation sulfonylureas, but not the third generation glimepiride, and glinides increased the risk of overall cancer, speci�cally hepatocellular cancer but it was less frequently associated with breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, or bladder cancer. It was also found that this increased but slightly less risk as compared to insulin supported the hypothesis that an increasing insulin level plays an important role in carcinogenesis [74] . No other studies looked at the particular association of sulfonylurea use and breast cancer risk. eir relatively short-term use clinically does not permit any meaningful data on their malignancy risks. Sitagliptin did show increased pancreatic ductal hyperplasia in a small rodent model study which may predispose to pancreatic cancer risk although one short-term study involving human pancreatic cancer cell lines did not show this [75] [76] [77] . No data is available on the association of DPPIV inhibitors, GLP-1 agonists, and breast cancer risk due to their introduction recently in the diabetes management.

A recent metaanalysis, including 562,043 participants and 14,085 cases of cancer, was published assessing the risk of cancer during treatment with insulin. It showed that insulin treatment was associated with an increased risk of overall cancer (RR (95% CI) = 1.39 (1.14, 1.70)) especially with pancreatic cancer (RR (95% CI) = 4.78 (3.12, 7.32)) [78] . As for the association of insulin therapy with breast cancer, the UK's General Practice Research Database included a cohort of 15,227 women with type 2 diabetes, treated with insulin glargine (4,579 users) and matched with users of other insulins (10,648 users), and followed up till the �rst breast cancer diagnosis or until the end of December 2009, of which 246 developed breast cancer during the 8-year followup. It was shown that insulin glargine was not associated with an increased risk of breast cancer during the �rst 5 years of use. However, longer-term use may increase this risk, particularly in women with the longstanding use of insulin before starting insulin glargine [79] . Signi�cant association of insulin therapy and breast cancer cases cannot be deduced due to the lack of substantial evidence. In the ORIGIN trial, which was primarily oriented at determining whether the use of insulin glargine, as compared to standard care, in patients with impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance, would affect cardiovascular outcome, insulin glargine was not shown to have any signi�cant increase in cancers (hazard ratio, 1.00; 95% CI, 0.88 to 1.13;
). It is important to note that this study included 12,537 participants whose mean age was around 65 who had cardiovascular risk factors plus impaired fasting glucose, impaired glucose tolerance, or early diabetes. Insulin glargine was shown to have a neutral effect on cardiovascular outcomes and cancers [80] .
Idiopathic scoliosis is the most common of all forms of lateral deviation of the spine. By definition, it is a lateral curvature of the spine in an otherwise healthy child, for which a currently recognizable cause has not been found. Less common but better defined etiologies of the disorder include scoliosis of neuromuscular origin, congenital scoliosis, scoliosis in neurofibromatosis, and mesenchymal disorders like Marfan's syndrome [3] .
The prevalence of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS), when defined as a curvature greater than 10° according to Cobb, is 2-3%. The prevalence of curvatures greater than 20° is between 0.3 and 0.5%, while curvatures greater than 40° Cobb are found in less than 0.1% of the population. All etiologies of scoliosis other than AIS are encountered more rarely [4] .
The anatomical level of the deformity has received attention from clinicians as a basis for scoliosis classification. The level of the apex vertebra (i.e., thoracic, thoracolumbar, lumbar or double major) forms a simple basis for description. In 1983, King and colleagues [5] classified different curvature patterns by the extent of spinal fusion required; however, recent reports have suggested that these classifications lack reliability. Recently, a new description has been developed by Lenke and colleagues [6] . This approach calls for clinical assessment of scoliosis and kyphosis with respect to sagittal profile and curvature components. Systems designed for conservative management include the classifications by Lehnert-Schroth [7] (functional three-curve and functional four-curve scoliosis) and by Rigo [8] (brace construction and application).
The primary aim of scoliosis management is to stop curvature progression [9] . Improvement of pulmonary function (vital capacity) and treatment of pain are also of major importance. The first of three modes of conservative scoliosis management is based on physical therapy, including Méthode Lyonaise [10] , Side-Shift [11] , Dobosiewicz [12] , Schroth and others [7] . Although discussed from contrasting viewpoints in the international literature, there is some evidence for the effectiveness of scoliosis treatment by physical therapy alone [13] .
It has to be emphasized that (1) physical therapy for scoliosis is not just general exercises but rather one of the cited methods designed to address the particular nuances of spinal deformity, and (2) application of such methods requires therapists and clinicians specifically trained and certified in those scoliosis specific conservative intervention methods.
The second mode of conservative management is scoliosis intensive rehabilitation (SIR), which appears to be effective with respect to many signs and symptoms of scoliosis and with respect to impeding curvature progression [14] . The third mode of conservative management is brace treatment, which has been found to be effective in preventing curvature progression and thus in altering the natural history of IS [15, 16] . It appears that brace treatment may reduce the prevalence of surgery [17] , restore the sagittal profile [18] and influence vertebral rotation [19] . There are also indications that the end result of brace treatment can be predicted [20] .
Guidelines for conservative intervention are based on current information regarding the risk for significant curvature progression in a given period of time. Each case has its own natural history and must be considered on an individual basis, in the context of a thorough clinical evaluation and patient history [21] . Estimation of risk for progression is based on small (n < 1000) epidemiological surveys in which children were diagnosed with scoliosis, and radiographed periodically to quantify changes in curvature magnitude over time . Such surveys support the premise that, among populations of children with a diagnosis of idiopathic scoliosis, risk for progression is highly correlated with potential for growth over the period of observation. In boys, prognosis for progression is more favorable, with relatively fewer individuals having curves that progress to >40 degrees. For SOSORT guidelines, prognostic risk estimation is based on the calculation of Lonstein and Carlson [33] . This calculation is based on curvature progression observed among 727 patients (575 female, 152 male) diagnosed between 1974-1979 in state of Minnesota (United States) school screening programs, and followed until they reached skeletal maturity. (See Figure 1) .
a. < 15° Cobb: Observation (6 -12 month intervals) b. Cobb angle 15-20°: Outpatient physical therapy with treatment-free intervals (6-12 weeks without physical therapy for those patients at that time have low risk for curve progression). In this context, 'Outpatient physical therapy' is defined here as exercise sessions initiated at the physical therapist's office, plus a home exercise program (two to seven sessions per week according to the physical therapy method being applied). After three months, one exercise session every two weeks may be sufficient. 
utpatient physical therapy, scoliosis intensive rehabilitation program (SIR), where available
The estimation of the prognostic risk to be used during pubertal growth spurt (modified from Lonstein and Carlson [33] ) Figure 1 The estimation of the prognostic risk to be used during pubertal growth spurt (modified from Lonstein and Carlson [33] ). The numbers in the figure indicate the number of cases that each data point is based on. Note the small number of cases on which the upper margins of the graph are based. Lonstein and Carlson's progression estimation formula is based on curves between 20 and 29 degrees.
VI. Adolescents and adults with scoliosis (of any degree) and chronic pain Outpatient physical therapy, scoliosis intensive rehabilitation program (SIR) where available, with a special pain program (multimodal pain concept/behavioral + physical concept), brace treatment when a positive effect has been proven [45] .
The prognostic estimation and corresponding indications for treatment apply to the most prevalent condition, idiopathic scoliosis. In other types of scoliosis a similar procedure can be applied. Exceptions include those cases where the prognosis is clearly worse, for example in neuromuscular scolioses where a wheelchair is necessary (early surgery for maintaining sitting capability may be required). -others to be individually considered [46] 
The potential role of Human cytomegalovirus (hCM) infection in promoting neoplasia is an active area of scientific research. [1] Although still controversial, there is a growing body of evidence that links hCMV infection to a variety of malignancies, including those of the breast, prostate, colon, lung and brain (gliomas). [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] hCMV induces alterations in regulatory proteins and non-coding RNA that are associated with a malignant phenotype. These changes promote tumour survival by effecting cellular proliferation, invasion, immune evasion, and production of angiogenic factors [8] Constant immune surveillance governs the destruction of the majority of cancer cells and precancerous conditions in the human body. However, the most pathogenic of malignant tumors acquire immune evasion strategies which render them less vulnerable to destruction by immune cells.
The characteristic hallmarks of a malignant cell include:
1. sustaining proliferative signaling and evading growth suppressors, 2. resisting cell death and enabling replicative immortality, 3. inducing angiogenesis, activating invasion and metastasis. [9] In cancers which are not attributable to infectious agents, chronic inflammation may also play a critical role in the transition from a precancerous condition to invasive malignancy. Inflammation is the seventh hallmark of neoplasia (Table 1) . [10] During chronic inflammation, certain "promoters," such as hepatitis C virus and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), may facilitate the transformation of a pre-malignant condition to neoplasia. [11, 12] Cancer "promoters" are agents that, by themselves, may not have a significant oncogenic impact on normal cells but can drive precancerous cells towards neoplasia. 
Associations linking chronic infection, chronic inflammation and malignancy have been well chronicled. [13] As many as 25% of all cancers can be traced to chronic infection or other types of chronic inflammation. [14] Infectious agents that cause chronic inflammation promote oncogenesis by complex pathways, and are depicted in Figure 1 . Key mediators of inflammation-induced oncogenesis include generation of mutagenic chemical mediators such as reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, genetic variations in inflammatory cytokines [15] , and creation of a micro-environment with features of chronic inflammation such as nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB). [16, 17] In such conditions, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) play a pivotal role in mediating inflammatory (M1) responses, as well as immunosuppressive and growth (M2) responses. [18] M2-polarized TAMs and the related myeloid-derived suppressor cells are key components of smoldering inflammation that drives neoplastic progression. The M2 responses, while important for wound healing, can promote neoplastic transformation. TAMs respond to cytokines such as Interleukin (IL)-10 and Transforming Growth Factor (TGF)-β, acquiring M2 properties that promote immune suppression by blocking dendritic cell (DC) maturation and attracting regulatory T-cells (T-regs). [19, 20] T-regs are potent inhibitors of the T-cell antitumor response. [21] Activation of NF-κB pathway mediated by COX-2 and IL-6 via STAT-3 transcriptional activation also promotes malignant transformation. [22] NF-κB is a transcription factor that mediates an inflammatory cascade leading to generation of COX-2, an inducible isoform of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and the inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, and Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) -α. These cytokines, in conjunction with nitric oxide produced by TAMs and tumor cells, are present in high concentration in the tumor microenvironment and are important promoters of inflammation-driven oncogenesis and immunosuppression. [23] [24] [25] 
Tumor cells have aberrations in cell cycle signaling, RNA transcription and the production of tumor-suppression proteins. The concept of "oncomodulation" suggests that a virus may modulate cellular pathways [26] through changes to viral regulatory proteins and noncoding RNA which eludes to tumor cell properties (cell proliferation, survival, invasion, production of angiogenic factors, and immune evasion). hCMV not only promotes oncogenesis but also contributes to a more malignant tumor cell phenotype ( Figure 2 ). While investigators have long postulated a role for hCMV in human neoplasia, many of the early studies were not reproducible and lacked clear in situ histopathological correlations with the proposed diseases. [27, 28] The concept of "hit-and-run" oncogenesis holds that infection with hCMV takes place during an earlier time frame to tumour development. hCMV infection sets into motion processes resulting in malignancy, but the virus is no longer detectable by the time cancer occurs. [29] Several of the more important cellular pathways that could lead to cancer and which are modulated by hCMV are reviewed below.
Resistance to apoptosis is a common feature of cancer cells. [9, 30, 31] Early research on hCMV infection revealed that hCMV protects the fibroblasts it infects from apoptosis. hCMV immediate early (IE) proteins (e.g., IE2-86 & IE2-72) [32] are able to prevent adenovirus E1A protein-induced apoptosis-by both p53-dependent and independent mechanisms-of hCMV infected fibroblasts. Direct anti-apoptotic activity of hCMV proteins is related to defined transcripts encoded by the hCMV UL36-UL37 genes. [33, 34] The product of the UL36 gene is an inhibitor of caspase activation which binds to the pro-domain of caspase-8 and inhibits Fasmediated apoptosis. [35] Similarly, the UL37 gene product, UL37 exon 1, is a mitochondrial inhibitor of apoptosis and inhibits the recruitment of the pro-apoptotic proteins Bax and Bak to mitochondria, resulting in their functional inactivation. [36] hCMV further protects tumor cells from apoptosis by the induction of cellular proteins, including AKT, Bcl-2, and ΔNp73α.
[37] Induction of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 by hCMV, results in acquired resistance to cytotoxic drugs such as cisplatin and etoposide. This resistance can be reversed after treatment with the anti-hCMV drug, ganciclovir.
[ 37] Engagement of platelet derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) α or virus co-receptors (including integrins and Toll-like receptor-2) by hCMV glycoproteins can also lead to activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and/or phosphatidyl-inositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) pathways that can alter apoptotic responses ( Figure 3 ). [38] [39] [40] 
Adhesion of cancer cells to endothelium is critical in promoting metastases. [41] [42] [43] hCMV can facilitate this process by promoting activation of integrins (e.g., β1α5 and B1) on the tumor cell surface, and by increasing adhesion of tumor cells to the neighboring endothelium. Tumor cell adhesion to endothelium is also facilitated by activation of integrin-linked kinases (e.g., phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase Tyr397). [4,,44 ] Down regulation of adhesion molecule receptors by hCMV (e.g., neural cell adhesion molecule, CD56), causes a focal disruption of endothelial cells facilitating tumor cell transmigration. [1, 45] The net effects of hCMV on adhesion molecules account for decreased binding of cancer cells to each other and Manifestations of Cytomegalovirus Infectionincreased binding to endothelium, which is an important early process in formation of metastasis.
Angiogenesis is the growth of the new blood vessels and is essential for growth of malignant tumors. [9, 46] Through the technique of secretome analysis researchers have shown that proteins secreted from hCMV-infected cells contain increased levels of pro-angiogenic molecules, and increased pro-angiogenic activity in cell-free supernatants. [47] US28 is a hCMV protein seen in high concentrations in the supernatant. This particular protein alters adhesion properties of epithelial cells inducing a pro-angiogenic and transformed phenotype through up-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). [48] Additional supernatant proteins, including IE1-72 and IE2-86, increase vascular smooth muscle cell migration, proliferation, and expression of PDGF-β receptor. Furthermore, IE2-86 promotes endothelial proliferation by binding and inactivating the tumor oncogene p53 in endothelial cells. [49, 50] Expression of IL-8, another well-recognized promoter of tumor angiogenesis, is increased by hCMV via transactivation of IL-8 promoter through the cellular transcription factors NF-κB and AP-1. [51] Binding of hCMV to and signaling through integrin β1, integrin β3, and epidermal growth factor receptor can also promote angiogenesis. [47, 52] 
The Oncogenicity of Human Cytomegalovirus http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/55051
Expression of thrombospondin (TSP-1), a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis, is suppressed in several hCMV-infected cancer cell lines, suggesting yet another mechanism by which hCMV can promote increased angiogenesis and a more malignant phenotype. [53, 54] hCMVmediated activation of COX-2 may also promote angiogenesis in tumor cells by inducing expression of Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF), VEGF, PDGF, iNOS, and TGF-α, and by promoting capillary endothelial cell migration and tube formation (Figure 3 ). [55] 
In hCMV-infected host cells, viral regulatory proteins induce cell cycle arrest and prevent cellular DNA replication, whilst replication of viral DNA remains enabled. [8, 56] While some hCMV regulatory proteins can induce cell cycle arrest, others can promote cell cycle progression. [57, 58] hCMV IE2-86 induces cell cycle arrest by activating ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene-dependent phosphorylation of p53, leading to p53-and p21-dependent inhibition of cell cycle progression. [59] In contrast, the hCMV regulatory proteins IE1-72, IE2-86, and the tegument proteins pp71 and UL97 interact with and deactivate proteins of the Rb family, promoting entry into S-phase of the cell cycle. [60] The cell cycle of neoplastic cells is inherently dysfunctional. [9, 31] In precancerous or transformed cells, the function of virus regulatory proteins may depend on the replicative status of the cell. [61, 62] The hCMV protein US28 promotes cell cycle progression and cyclin D1 expression in cells with a neoplastic phenotype; whereas, it induces apoptosis in non-neoplastic cells. [48] Persistent hCMV infection of tumor cells may lead to a selection of virus variants with changes in virus regulatory proteins that have lost their ability to induce cell cycle arrest. [63, 64] 
Immunological tolerance is a process by which the immune system no longer recognizes an aberrant antigen as "foreign." [67] Through "natural" or "self-tolerance" the body does not mount an immune response to self-antigens. "Induced tolerance" to external antigens can be created by manipulating the immune system. Mechanisms of tolerance that exist to prevent autoimmune disease may also preclude the development of an adequate antitumor response. [65] [66] [67] This concept of "immune tolerance" may be particularly important in malignancies whose etiology is associated with inflammation. [68] Expression of hCMV proteins by infected tumor cells may induce 'immune tolerance' to tumor cells. Also, several tumor-derived factors contribute to the emergence of complex local and regional immunosuppressive networks, including VEGF, IL-10, TGF-β, and prostaglandin E-2 (PGE2). [66, 69] hCMV has evolved multiple strategies for immune evasion resulting in persistent viral infection in the host [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] Several hCMV proteins, including those expressed with IE genes, block the host cell MHC class I antigen expression, which is essential for activation of CD8+ T-lymphocyte anti-tumor cytotoxicity. hCMV UL83 protein (pp65) blocks antigen presentation of hCMV epitopes to CD8+ T-cells, and expression of hCMV UL18, a MHC class I homologue, disrupts "natural killer" (NK) cell recognition of hCMV-infected cells. [75] Disruption of hCMV antigen presentation by infected cells is mediated by hCMV protein US3, which sequesters MHC class I complexes in the endoplasmic reticulum, and hCMV protein US11 which causes dislocation of the MHC class I heavy chain from the cytoplasm. [76] [77] [78] hCMVencoded IL-10 homologue impairs tumor antigen presentation by inhibiting maturation, normal differentiation and cytokine production of dendritic cells and macrophages.. [79] [80] [81] hCMV induces integrin α v β 6 expression in endothelial cells of blood vessels in different tissues, causing activation of TGF-β1, resulting in interference of host immune responses against tumor cells by blocking the activation of lymphocytes and monocyte derived phagocytes. [82] These direct immune-modulatory effects of hCMV on myeloid cells within the tumor microenvironment, along with expression of immunosuppressive cytokines provide a virtually impassable environment for the host anti-tumor immune system.
Persistent hCMV infection of non-neoplastic cells in the tumor microenvironment leads to a paracrine secretion of inflammatory molecules that promote malignancy. [83] The secretome of hCMV-infected fibroblasts contains exceedingly high levels of growth factors, matrix remodeling proteins such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and angiogenic factors that signal through the TGF-β pathway. [47, 84] These paracrine-secreted factors are also able to activate latent growth factors. PDGFs acts as strong mitogens and their overexpression is important in the pathogenesis of multiple malignancies. [85] [86] [87] In addition to growth factors, high levels of many ECM modifiers such as MMPs, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) and urokinase receptor (uPAR) secreted by hCMV infected cells aiding, tumor invasion and metastasis. [84] 6. DNA mutations, impaired DNA repair mechanisms and epigenetic changes by hCMV that leads to genomic instability hCMV infection can drive neoplastic transformation by causing chromosome damage and genetic instability in infected cells, particularly in vulnerable adult stem cells. [88] [89] [90] hCMV in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy agents synergistically increases genotoxic effects. [91, 92] The virus can induce specific chromosome 1 strand breaks at positions 1q42 and 1q21 in a replication-independent fashion, both of which are associated with DNA repair and replication genes. [89, 93, 94] hCMV IE1-72 and IE2-86 proteins when in conjunction with other viral oncogenic proteins (e.g., adenovirus E1A protein) that disrupt cell cycle can induce oncogenic transformation. [29] hCMV can contribute to genomic instability through a variety of different pathways. In brief, the virus may induce chromosomal aberrations (e.g., production of micronuclei, misaligned chromosomes, chromosomal lagging and bridging) by hCMV UL76 protein. [95, 96] The virus can also disrupt DNA repair pathways, including the activity of ATM and ATM-Rad3 (ATR). [97] More recently, hCMV has been shown to modulate oncogenesis through the telomerase pathway by activating human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) in fibroblasts and malignant cells. [98] 
Significant advances have been made in understanding the roles of chronic inflammation, tumor microenvironment, cancer stem cells, tumor immunology, and infectious agents in the pathobiology of cancer. Several clinical and experimental findings suggest that hCMV may play a role in promoting certain cancers. In cells that are persistently infected with hCMV, the expression of viral proteins may prevent the immune system from identifying or removing these cells, thereby offsetting immune detection of transformed cells. The effects of hCMV in promoting tumor cell immune evasion may prove important in development of cancer immunotherapies, particularly if the hCMV-infected cells are resistant to the action of cytolytic peptides released by activated NK and cytotoxic T-cells. Also, if viral proteins that inhibit apoptosis are expressed by hCMV infected tumour cells, the cancer cells may be less susceptible conventional chemotherapeutic agents. Whether hCMV is ultimately established as an oncogenic virus will require additional research in the areas of virology, epidemiology and molecular oncology, and systematic refinement of the concept of "oncomodulation." Insights into the role of hCMV in oncogenesis may increase understanding of cancer biology and promote development of novel therapeutic strategies. 

In a recent paper (Sabelis and Bakker, 1992) we calculated the optimal number of dorsal setae required to minimize somal contact with sticky structures, such as silken threads forming the chaotically structured web spun by two-spotted spider mites. This calculation was based on two vital assumptions: (1) full avoidance of somal contact is achieved when the imaginary central axis is fully covered by the projections of the dorsal setae on this axis; and (2) investment per seta is proportional to setal length to the power 3 (which holds only when the seta is coneshaped and the setal diameter-length ratio is constant). While the first assumption is a gross oversimplification, the second assumption lacks support by hard data. In this paper we will ( 1 ) extend the optimality model to include a more general class of diameter-length relations with respect to dorsal setae, (2) present measurements of diameter-length relations in various genera of the Phytoseiidae and (3) predict the optimal number of setae for comparison with the actual number of dorsal setae. This test of the model will then be used to determine wbether the number of dorsal setae in phytosciid mites can be considered as an adaptation or a phylogenetic constraint.
Suppose that ( I ) the central axis has length L, (2) each seta has !ength l and a hooked shape with e being the length of the part perpendicular to the soma and l -e being the length of the remaining part parallel to the soma, (3) the setae are standing in a longitudinal row, are equal in length and their projections on the central axis (l') do not overlap. Finally, suppose that (4) the per seta investment in terms of resources (r) is proportional to the volume of a cone with length I and diameter d and that (5) because d and l should pass through the origin, the functional relationship is of the form l" = ~ d, where c~ and a are specific constants for the setae of the mites under study. Based on the last two assumptions total resource investment in setae (R) obeys the following relationship:
~7"/" R = n r = n ~l t', where b = 2a + l and ~ -12°z 2
Here, "7 is a constant of resource-volume proportionality. To obtain 100% protection over the full length of the central axis (L) without overlap of setae the number of setae should be equal to L divided by the projection L L length per seta: n = --or l = e + --. The optimal number of setae is now found (l-e) n by minimizing total resource investment R with respect to L:
The first derivative of R with respect to n yields:
Setting the first derivative equal to zero some algebraic manipulation leads to the following unique solution for n:
This solution represents the number of setae that minimizes R (the second derivative with respect to n is always positive!). Note that this solution differs by a factor 2 from the one presented in Sabelis and Bakker (1992) ; this was caused by an incorrrect change of sign (n -A in equation 4 of the Appendix should have been n+A).
This result shows that optimal investment in setae depends on (1) the difference (= e) between setal length and its projection on the central axis, and on (2) the type of non-linearity (a and thus also b), but not on the details of proportionality (a and thus -also/3) in the functional relationship between setal diameter and length. Hence, it is important to estimate the power for assessment of the type of non-linearity.
Using a light microscope with an ocular provided with a metric scale (0.25 Ix) the diameter and length of dorsal setae (j l, j3, j4, j5, j6, J2, z2, z4, s4, s6 The exponent a in the expression /" = a d was estimated by means of linear regression after taking logarithms at both sides and rewriting the expression as:
From the slope of the regression the exponent a can be calculated, whereas a can be obtained from the constant. The results are presented in Table 1 . Most remarkably, the slopes of three regression lines for Amblyseius, Typhlodromus and a single species in the genus Phytoseiulus are quite similar! This suggests that the structure' of the setae in these three genera have much in common. That the data on Phvtoseius do not conform to this pattern does not come as a surprise as the structure of their dorsal setae is strikingly different; they are very thick and strongly serrated. If we ignore Phytoseius spp., it can be concluded that the most simple and best fitting model to describe the relation between diameter and length for the other three genera is l"= cr dwith ~ = 5.7 and a = 0.64.
Under the assumptions in Sabelis and Bakker (1992) model correction leads to a twofold increase in n*. However, the estimate of a appears to be lower than the value a=l raken in Sabelis and Bakker (1992) and therefore leads to a reduction in n*. Thus, the two modifications have opposite effects on the optimal number of setae and the following formula for n* results:
This formula is instrumental in inferring whether phytoseiid mites are hypotrichous from a functional point of view. For central axes varying in length (L) from 250 to 350 ~m and for e being maximally I0 ~m, the optimal number of setae for 100% protection of either the margino-dorsal or the mid-dorsal region varies from 32 to 45 (for a definition of the two categories of dorsal setae see Sabelis and Bakker, 1992) . Clearly, Phytoseiidae with maximally I0 margino-dorsal and 12 mid-dorsal setae do not fall within this range. For this number of setae to be optimal the exponent a should be in the range of 0.13 to 0.24, which is definitely much lower and far outside the range of the values estimated from the diameterlength measurements. Note in addition that for Phytoseius with an exponent a larger than 0.64 the difference between predicted n* and the actual number of setae is even more pronounced! From a phylogenetic point of view evolution of idiosomal setation in the Phytoseiidae has proceeded largely through irreversible setal suppression from a holotrichous ancestor (Chant, t993) . Because of this reduced number of setal positions Phytoseiidac are referred to as being hypotrichous. From a functional viewpoint hypotrichy can be expected to evolve when the need for idiosomal protection is small. Foraging on glabrous leaves represents a case where the risk to get stuck is very low and a reduction in the number of setal positions might actually lead to increassed fitness. Hence, if the ancestral phytoseioid mites foraged on glabrous leaves, hypotrichy is likely to have evolved. However, due to the irreversible nature of the setal suppression a reduced number of setal positions may become a constraint when the foraging environment changes such that there is a need for increased protection of the idiosoma; for example, when phytoseioid mites may find profitable prey/food on pubescent leaves or in chaotically structured webs. Thus, the Phytoseiidae may have been trapped in an evolutionary path to hypotrichy and had no option but to lengthen the setae still present.
While the optimal allocation model is elegant due to its simplicity, it is not yet clear whether its predictions can stand up to scrutiny. Soil-inhabiting mesostigmatic mites, for example, basically have a larger number of setal positions (e.g. Lasioseius alii Chant has 20 mid-dorsal and 16 margino-dorsal setae; see Lindquist and Evans, 1965) and their soil environment presumably requires full protection, but the larger number of setal positions is still lower than the optimum n*, predicted by our model. Thus, there is much room for a more elaborate model that takes into account that setae have a bended rather than hooked shape, that they are positioned on a hemisphere, not in perfectly straight rows and not equidistantly, that setal structure and protection effect may depend on the type of environment (i.e. the exponent a is not a fixed constraint!) etc'. However, if we succeeded in outlining a quantitative approach to understand evolutionary trends in setal arrangement, we have reached our main goal.
In oxygen involving metabolisms like photorespiration and photosynthesis, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are natural byproducts (He and Häder 2002, Apel and Hirt 2004) in phototrophic microorganisms. Typical ROS are e.g. superoxide, hydroxyl, peroxyl, and alkoxy radicals. Under nonstressed conditions, production and scavenging of ROS in these microorganisms is in equilibrium (Apel and Hirt 2004) .
Different environmental stress factors like pollution, drought, temperature, excessive light intensities, and nutritional limitation are able to increase the production of ROS (Ehling-Schulz and Scherer 1999, Rijstenbil 2002 , Arora et al. 2002 . Oxidative stress is closely associated to these unstable but very reactive radicals (Fang et al. 2002) . Their highly reactive potential is discussed to be responsible for some human diseases e.g. cancer and cardiovascular diseases and is able to cause oxidative damages to proteins, DNA, and lipids (Jacobi and Burri, 1996) in both humans and microorganisms.
Microalgae have to counteract these negative effects by diverse effective enzymatic and nonenzymatic mechanisms (Apel and Hirt, 2004) . Several enzymes like superoxide dismutase, catalase peroxidase are able to scavenge ROS (Blokhina et al. 2003) . Carotenoids and fatty acids are two examples for non-enzymatic classes of substances which are able to protect the organism from oxidative damage (Sies and Stahl, 1995) . Tocopherol, flavonoids, and alkaloids are other examples for substances belonging to this group of non-enzymatic substances.
Two major but different mechanisms are known (Prior et al. 2005 ): Both mechanisms lead to a reduction of the radicals but differ in kinetics and propensity for side reactions (Prior et al. 2005 ). For hydrogen atom transfer, the antioxidants quench the free radicals by donating a hydrogen whereas for single electron transfer the antioxidants transfer one electron to the radical.
For estimating the antioxidative potential of chemical components, different experimental approaches were used (Prior et al. 2005 ). Most of them require a spectrophotometric measurement and a certain reaction time in order to obtain reproducible results (Kulisic et al. 2004) .
For example, the ß-carotene bleaching test (BCB) is based on the decolorization of ß-carotene by its reaction with radicals. This effect is measured at a wavelength of 470 nm after a reaction time of nearly 120 min. Other methods like the 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging method or the thiobarbituric acids reactive species (TBARS) assay work similar to the BCB test.
The TBARS assay uses the production of a pink pigment produced by the reaction of thiobarbituric acid (TBA) with malondialdehyd (MDA) and other secondary lipid peroxidation products (Kulisic et al. 2004) . Absorbance measurements at 532 nm serve as an indicator of the extent of lipid degradation.
The use of DPPH for a radical scavenging measuring method is described e.g. by Yen and Duh (1994) , Yordanov and Christova (1997), Masuda et al. (1999) , Anderson and Padhye (2004) , and Iwashima et al. (2005) . DPPH is a stable free radical in a methanolic solution. In its oxidized form, the DPPH radical has an absorbance maximum centered at about 520 nm (Molyneux, 2004) . The DPPH method is described as a simple, rapid and convenient method independent of sample polarity for screening of many samples for radical scavenging activity (Koleva et al. 2001 ). These advantages make the DPPH method interesting for testing microalgae as a natural source to scavenge radicals and to find out promising candidates for a commercial sense.
Usually, the DPPH absorbance is measured at a wavelength of 515 -520 nm (Bandoniene et al. 2002 , Pavlov et al. 2002 , Gazi et al. 2004 ). But here, demonstrated in Figure 1 , an applied modification of this DPPH-method is described enabling the measurement of the antioxidative potential of the microalgae's specific methanolic extracts. Spolaore et al. 2006 ). The demonstrated modified DPPH-method enables therefore the screening of microalgae as promising candidates in a commercial sense. Furthermore, the modified method can be used, e.g. if the aim of future investigations is the detection of the antioxidative potential of some microalgae influenced by different environmental parameters.

Two cyanophyceae (Synechocystis sp. PCC6803, Anabaena sp.), one rodophyceae (Porphyridium purpureum) and haptophyceae (Isochrysis galbana) and bacillariophyceae (Phaeodactylum tricornutum) were tested. Isochrysis galbana, Porphyridium purpureum, Phaeodactylum tricornutum were grown in artificial seawater (Tropic Marin, TAGIS, Germany) enriched with F/2 medium nutrients (Guillard and Ryther 1962) at 24 °C with a constant pH-value of the cultures at 8.3. Anabaena sp. and Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 were grown at 26 °C in BG-11 medium (Rippka et al. 1979 ) with a constant pH-value of 8.0. Each culture was grown at a constant light regime of 120 µmol photons m -2 s -1 . The pH-values were kept constant by automatic addition of pure CO 2 . At the end of the cultivation, the cultures were centrifuged, freeze-dried and stored at -20 °C.
The protocol of Bandoniene et al. (2002) with minor modifications was used for the preparation of the methanolic extracts. Samples of the freeze-dried microalgae were portioned in aliquots of 0.025 -1 g. Each of these aliquots was homogenized in 5 mL of 100 % methanol (instead of 80 % methanol) for 30 s on ice with an ULTRA-TURRAX T25 (IKA-Labortechnik, Staufen, Germany). Afterwards, the homogenates were injected through 0.2 µm PTFE-filter (instead of paper filter) into test tubes. The extracts with different biomass concentrations were used for the determination of the antioxidant properties.
Wavelength scans from 400 to 750 nm and the decrease in absorbance at 550 nm were measured with a dual-beam UV-VIS spectrophotometer (Uvikon XL, Bio-Tek Instruments, Bad Friedrichshall, Germany). A 550 as used in Equation (1) below was obtained by switching the spectrophotometer modus from a wavelength scan to a fixed wavelength modus.
DPPH radical. DPPH was obtained from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland). 2.5 mg DPPH were solved in 5 mL methanol (≈ 1.27 mmol L -1 ). This stock solution was daily prepared, used for the measurements, and kept in the dark at ambient temperature when not used. Using this stock solution enables the measurement of a calibration curve at 550 nm for calculating the DPPH concentration as follows 
2.25 mL methanol, 0.1 mL extract and 0.15 mL DPPH stock solution (resulting in a DPPH concentration of 76 µmol L -1 ) were mixed in one measuring cuvette. Furthermore, the extracts were measured with a second measuring cuvette containing 2.325 mL methanol, 0.1 mL extract and 0.075 mL DPPH stock solution (resulting in a DPPH concentration of 38 µmol L -1 ) for verification of the data obtained with the higher DPPH concentration. Additionally a reference cuvette filled with 2.4 mL methanol and 0.1 mL extract was used.
For a proper measurement of the antioxidative potential of the tested microalgae using the DPPH radical, the following procedure was successfully executed. For choosing the suitable wavelength, wavelength scans from 440 to 750 nm were done for both measuring and reference cuvette. The scans were run against pure methanol. Measurements in the measuring cuvette were performed 30 min after addition of DPPH in order to give enough time for the reaction of the cellular antioxidants with DPPH. During this 30 min, reference and measuring cuvette were kept in the dark at ambient temperature. Additionally, the reference cuvette was measured before and after the reaction in the measuring cuvette had taken place for verification that no changes of the absorptive properties of the microalgae extract had occurred in the absence of DPPH.
After wavelength scans were done (3 min) 0.3 mL of the α-tocopherol solution was added to both measuring and reference cuvette in order to achieve full reduction of the DPPH radicals. Then, the wavelength scans were repeated. This served to select an adequate wavelength which is influenced only by the DPPH radical (here 550 nm).
The absorbance decrease was then measured by using measuring and reference cuvette prepared and treated in the same way described above. But here the absorbance of the measuring cuvette was measured at 550 nm against the reference cuvette for elimination of the absorptive properties of the microalgae extract.
All measurements were performed in triplicate. Here, averages and standard deviations are presented.
The linear range of the absorbance decrease (see Figure 2 , below) was evaluated by means of a simple linear regression c DPPH = c DPPH , 0 + a 1 c E (2) .
with c DPPH obtained from Equation (1), c DPPH , 0 is the concentration added to the cuvette, c E the concentration of the microalgae extract. The slope a 1 is determined by linear regression of graphs like those in Figure 2 , below. The slope is used as a parameter for estimating the antioxidative potential of the investigated microalgae. 
The EC 50 value expresses the amount of microalgae extract necessary to decrease the absorbance of DPPH by 50 % (Antolovich et al. 2002) . The value can be determined graphically by plotting the absorbance against the used extract concentration or calculated by using the slope of the linear regression (Equation (2)).

Wavelength scans from all extracts were measured. In Figure 1 wavelength scans of reference and measuring cuvette of methanolic extracts of Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 are shown. Whereas the signal from the reference cuvette remained constant in the time between the two measurements at 0 and 30 min (coincident curves in Figure 1 ) the measuring cuvette showed an absorbance decrease below 530 nm after 30 min of DPPH addition. After adding α-tocopherol to this cuvette, the decrease continued. In contrast to results below 530 nm, the absorbance measured at 550 nm obtained the same value in the measuring cuvette after adding α-tocopherol (Figure 1) as the absorbance measured in the reference cuvette. Furthermore, the absorbance had a minimum at this wavelength. The absorbance decrease below 530 nm in the measuring cuvette in the presence of α-tocopherol was not representative for all extracts but showed possible interference of antioxidants and DPPH radical. Nevertheless, for all tested extracts a minimum occurred near 550 nm, and same values were obtained in the measuring and in the reference cuvette at 550 nm after adding α-tocopherol (data not shown). Therefore, 550 nm was selected as the most adequate wavelength for testing all microalgae extracts. By means of the experiments present in Figure 1 , the most suitable wavelength was determined (here 550 nm). According to the results presented there, absorbance changes at this wavelength reflect the chemical state of the DPPH radicals (oxidized or reduced state). Therefore this wavelength enables a straightforward analysis and interpretation of the measured absorbance decrease.
For its function as a measure of antioxidant potential, absorbance at the selected wavelength should be mainly influenced by the DPPH radical and not by interference as caused by antioxidants (Bondet et al. 1997 ), e.g. carotenoids and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). This problem is illustrated in Figure 1 . Wavelength signals below 530 nm are strongly influenced by carotenoids (Britton 1995 ). This could lead to a misinterpretation of the measured absorbance decrease when a wavelength is chosen which is influenced by both DPPH radical and the absorptive properties of the extract (as by carotenoids).
A major part of this kind of interference can be eliminated by running the absorbance measurement against a reference cuvette filled with the same extract concentration as in the measuring cuvette.
The absorbance measurements for all five microalgae were done by the same protocol. Below, in Figures 2 to 5, representative records for two microalgae are shown. The good signal-noise ratio for all measurements enables a straight-forward interpretation of the data.
Absorbance measurements were done at two concentrations of DPPH. In Figure 2 Adding α-tocopherol after the DPPH measurements indicate that the remaining DPPH radicals are responsible for the remaining absorbance in Figure 2 . Figure 3 displays the effect of α-tocopherol on the absorbance measurements at 550 nm for Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. The addition of the vitamin causes a nearly complete decrease of the absorbance to values close to zero. Since this occurs for all extract concentrations it becomes evident that the remaining signal in the absorbance decrease in Figure 2 is due to DPPH radicals not reduced by the extract concentrations of Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. Figure 4 show also a linear, parallel decrease at low extract concentrations. Again, the curves obtained at both DPPH concentrations saturate at higher extract concentrations. However, in contrast to the upper curve in Figure 2 , the upper curve in Figure 4 reaches values near zero. Again, adding α-tocopherol shows that the remaining absorbance in Figure 4 is due to unreduced DPPH radicals, as it decreases the absorbance to values close to zero ( Figure 5) .
Employing extraction by methanol imposes some caveats with respect to extract concentration and kind of antioxidants. Figures 2 and 4 shows saturation of the absorbance decrease when plotted vs. extract concentration. This saturation can be explained by the limited capacity of methanol to extract the antioxidants from the aliquots of the freeze-dried microalgae. With both DPPH concentrations, the similar amounts of DPPH were oxidised in dependence of biomass concentration. The same decrease in the saturating region indicated that only the amount of antioxidants which were extracted (and not what was in the aliquots) were measured by this procedure. This effect leads to the assumption that the used volume of methanol is not able to extract the complete content of carotenoids and PUFAs from the investigated microalgae samples. This explanation is supported by the effect of α-tocopherol on the absorbance measurements. Linear regressions calculated according to Equation (2) . Figure 3 and Figure 5 show that the remaining absorbance in Figures 2 and 4 is due to remaining DPPH radicals, because they all can be converted to their reduced form by adding α-tocopherol. This is indicated by the fact that absorbance at 550 nm reaches values close to zero.
In the first place, the results of Figures 2 and 4 demonstrate a valuable benefit of the method: The slope in Figures 2 and 4 is a direct measure of the antioxidative potential of the investigated sample of microalgae. Thus, this slope yields a useful tool for the direct comparison of different extracts with respect to their antioxidant potential. The determination of the slope is independent from the selected wavelength. The slope can also be calculated when a different wavelength is employed, which may be more suitable for other microalgae or chemicals. The slope offers the possibility for direct comparison of microalgal antioxidative potential. A further very important result of Figures 2 and 4 is the independence of the slope on DPPH concentration. This provides an important advantage over the interpretation of the antioxidative capacity based on the EC 50 value (Table 1 ). On the other hand, the non-linearity as caused by limited methanol capacity imposes the caveat that the biomass concentration should not be too high, i.e., not exceeding the linear part in Figures 2 and 4 .
In order to make sure that the linear part is not exceeded the experiment should be repeated with different biomass concentrations. Then the linear part can be evaluated by linear regression.
The other caveat arises from the feature that methanolic extraction excludes the detection of the antioxidative potential of water soluble antioxidative substances, e.g. ascorbat, gluthathion, phycocyanin (Romay et al. 1998 ). Because of the freeze-dried status of the microalgal samples and the use of methanol as extracting agent mainly the carotenoids and fatty acids are the most likely candidates causing the decrease of DPPH absorbance (Figures 2 and 4 , containing the linear regressions by using Equation (2)). Methanolic soluble microalgal compounds like carotenoids and PUFAs as well as some proteins are known to exhibit antioxidative potential (Fang et al. 2002) . Nevertheless, due to the non-specifity of the methanolic extract for one of the two compound classes (carotenoids and PUFAs) it is not possible to find out which substances of each microalgae are responsible for the absorbance decrease of the DPPH solution. This requires further investigations.
Describing the reaction of DPPH with the antioxidant as a bimolecular reaction leads to 
leads to
Transforming Equation (11) Equation (14) still works when A T >> (K • A SOL ). This result explains the saturation effect of the solvent with increasing A T in Figures 2 and 4 . The dissolved amount of antioxidants is limited by the used amount of the solvent.
The analysis of the absorbance measurements at low concentrations of five different microalgae extract's (see Table 1 ) reveals different slopes by using Equation (2) Comparing the data analysed by both DPPH concentrations in Table 1 , it becomes clear that the benefits of the here demonstrated method give better results because the values results from averaged data points compared to EC 50 .
The problem for a proper interpretation of the results is the high variety and a possible influence of the individual composition of carotenoids and fatty acids in each microalgae sample (Wada and Murata 1990 , Yongmanitchai and Ward 1991 , Allakhverdiev et al. 1999 , Kosakowska et al. 2004 ). For a direct comparison of the antioxidative potential of microalgae environmental conditions, e.g. temperature, light intensity, and pH-value must be controlled during the cultivations. This requires a high instrumented photobioreactor system which enables the cultivation of the microalgae under strictly defined conditions (Marxen et al. 2005) and is therefore suitable to investigate the influence of these cultivation parameters on the antioxidative potential of microalgae.
The vestibular system detects angular and linear accelerations of the head in space. Even though most previous studies on the human vestibular system focus on sensori-motor control of eye movements and posture, various studies in patients and healthy human subjects also suggest an important contribution of the vestibular system to cognitive aspects such as spatial and bodily cognition. Nevertheless, the underlying mechanisms are still largely unknown.
Clinical evidence suggests that peripheral vestibular loss leads to deWcits in spatial cognition such as spatial navigation, learning or memory abilities Smith et al. 2005) . Thus, patients with unilateral peripheral vestibular loss suVer from deWcits in path integration during active goal-directed locomotion (Glasauer et al. 2002; Peruch et al. 2005 ) and navigation in virtual environments (Peruch et al. 1999 (Peruch et al. , 2005 suggesting that vestibular processing contributes to spatial cognition. Vestibular mechanisms have also been shown to be important for own body processing. For example a functional and anatomical relationship between spatial neglect subsequent to right hemispheric brain damage-leading to deWcits in spatial and bodily processing-and vestibular disturbances has previously been discussed (for an overview see Karnath and Dietrich 2006) . This link is supported by the fact that caloric vestibular stimulation and galvanic vestibular stimulation (GVS) may temporarily decrease symptoms of spatial neglect such as rightwards bias in visuo-spatial tasks (Cappa et al. 1987; Rode et al. 1992; Bottini et al. 2005) as well as symptoms of disturbed bodily awareness (Vallar 1998; Fink et al. 2003) . Vestibular dysfunctions have also been reported in neurological patients with disturbed own body perceptions due to damage in the temporo-parietal cortex (Devinsky et al. 1989; Blanke et al. 2004) . Direct electrical stimulation of this region may also induce out-ofbody experiences (PenWeld and Erickson 1941; Blanke et al. 2002) as well as vestibular illusions (Blanke et al. 2002; Kahane et al. 2003) at similar stimulation sites. Collectively these Wndings suggest an important vestibular contribution to spatial and bodily processing (for review see Lenggenhager et al. 2006; Lopez and Blanke 2007) .
Similarly, several studies have reported vestibular contributions to spatial and bodily processing in healthy subjects. Thus, it has been shown that visuo-spatial judgments such as line-bisection, visual vertical judgment and body orientation judgment Mars et al. 2005) , spatial memory (Bächtold et al. 2001) , and mental transformation (Mast and Meissner 2004; Mast et al. 2006) can be inXuenced by vestibular stimulation. Mast et al. (2006) showed that caloric vestibular stimulation leads to impaired performance in mental transformation tasks, but not in a control task using mental imagery.
Here we will focus on mental transformation since it is a spatial cognitive ability that may also rely on bodily processing. At least two diVerent kinds of mental transformation have initially been described, object-based mental transformation (Shepard and Metzler 1971) and egocentric mental transformation (Parsons 1987) . Only a few studies have directly investigated the inXuence of vestibular processing on either type of mental transformation (Mast et al. 2006; Mast and Meissner 2004) . Mast and colleagues (2006) showed that performance in mental transformation is generally decreased during caloric vestibular stimulation. More interestingly for the scope of the present study, they showed that in an egocentric mental transformation task performance can be modiWed in a direction-speciWc way by vestibular stimulation during physical body rotations (Mast and Meissner 2004) . In this study, subjects were more accurate when the direction of physical rotation and egocentric mental transformation were congruent, suggesting that egocentric mental transformation shares mechanisms with physical body rotation. Thus, both actual and mental body transformation seem to rely on vestibular cues. This is further corroborated by the Wnding that egocentric mental transformations (imagined sensation of body motion) may induce a direction-speciWc vestibulo-ocular reXex (Rodionov et al. 2004) and that performance in mental transformation of pictures of human bodies and body parts decreases in microgravity (Grabherr et al. 2007 ). Collectively, these data suggest that egocentric mental transformation depends partly on vestibular processing.
The present study was designed to investigate the eVects of GVS on mental transformations. First, we were interested whether there is an overall decrease in performance in mental transformation tasks during GVS as compared to sham stimulation. Mast et al. (2006) reported impaired performance in a mental transformation task, but not in a non-spatial control task during caloric vestibular stimulation. GVS may interact with mental transformation due to overlapping and interfering neural mechanisms between GVS and mental transformation. The comparison to sham stimulation was chosen to control for attentional eVects due to skin/pain sensation. Second, we also investigated whether the direction of the illusory body motion induced by right and left GVS inXuences diVerently clockwise and counterclockwise mental transformations. Using binaural bipolar GVS it is possible to evoke illusory body motion to the right or the left by reversing electrode polarity (Fitzpatrick and Day 2004) . Therefore, based on the results of Mast and Meissner (2004) , we hypothesized that mental transformation performance might improve when the direction of the illusory body motion and mental transformation are congruent, but deteriorate when incongruent. Third, we investigated whether object-based and egocentric mental transformations are diVerently inXuenced by GVS. Previous literature suggests that subjects tend to use an object-based mental transformation (imagined rotation of the picture in space) when pictures of non-human objects are presented, but use an egocentric perspective-based mental transformation (imagined turning of oneself in space) for pictures of human bodies (Zacks and Tversky 2005) . Based on these results and observations that egocentric perspective-based mental transformation seems to interact with vestibular processing (Rodinov et al. 2004; Mast and Meissner 2004) , we hypothesized that the eVect of GVS would be stronger for pictures representing a human body than a non-human object. Finally, we were interested whether left and right GVS would inXuence mental transformation diVerently. Fink et al. (2003) found diVerent cerebral activation patterns for left versus right GVS. During right anodal stimulation they found bilateral activations in superior temporal, posterior insular and inferior parietal regions as well as right lateral occipito-parietal activations, whereas activations during left anodal GVS were conWned to the right hemisphere only (superior temporal gyrus, posterior insular cortex, anterior inferior parietal cortex). Therefore, based on the above-mentioned assumption of common and interfering neural mechanisms we hypothesised that left and right GVS could diVerently inXuence cortical mental transformation processes.

Eleven right-handed (Edinburgh handedness inventory; OldWeld 1971) volunteers (Wve females-six males, 23.3 § 4 years) without a history of neurological, psychiatric or vestibular disorders (as veriWed by questioning) participated in this study. They all had normal or corrected-tonormal vision. Subjects had no prior experience with galvanic or caloric vestibular stimulation. Informed consent was obtained from all subjects prior to their inclusion in the study. The study protocol was approved by the local ethics research committee at the University of Lausanne and has been performed in accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki.
Galvanic vestibular stimulation (GVS) was applied using a bipolar, binaural conWguration. A stimulator (Model Grass S48, Astor-Med Inc, West Warwick, RI, USA) was used to deliver a square wave pulse through an isolation unit (Model Grass SIU5) and a constant current stimulus unit (Model Grass CCU1) to the electrodes (diameter, 10 mm; Grass Gold Electrodes). This setting provides a safe and constant current output with the anode on one side and the cathode on the other side (Fig. 1a) . For the GVS, the electrodes were placed on the left and right mastoid processes. We also introduced the principle of sham stimulation, as it is often used in transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) studies (George et al. 1996; Pascual-Leone et al. 1996) . The electrodes were placed on the left and right side of the neck »5 cm below the GVS electrodes. Right GVS refers to right anodal stimulation, and left GVS to left anodal stimulation. Using such a binaural bipolar conWguration, GVS is known to increase the Wring rate in vestibular aVerents on the cathodal side and to decrease the Wring rate on the anodal side (Goldberg et al. 1984) . This change in the Wring rate has been associated with illusory movements of both own body (Mars et al. 2005; Fitzpatrick et al. 2002) and visual Weld (Zink et al. 1998) .
The individual threshold for stimulation was determined by progressively increasing the current amplitude (step size of 0.1 mA) separately for right and left GVS as well as for sham stimulations. For GVS, the current amplitude was Wrst progressively increased until the subjects (who were naïve to the eVects of GVS) reported vestibular sensations. Then, accounting for the fact that higher current amplitudes lead to stronger vestibular eVects, the amplitude was further increased to the maximal current amplitude at which skin sensations were still judged as tolerable. The mean current amplitude was 1.0 § 0.2 mA and did not diVer between right and left GVS. For the sham stimulation no vestibular sensation was elicited and thresholds were Wxed so that subjects reported approximately the same intensity of pain or heat sensation on the skin as during the GVS. The mean current was 0.6 § 0.2 mA.
All stimuli were presented on a high-resolution computer screen (1,280 £ 1,024 pixels) at 1 m distance from the subject Fig. 1 Stimuli and experimental set-up. a For bipolar, binaural galvanic vestibular or sham stimulation an electrical stimulator was used to deliver a square wave pulse through an isolation unit and a constant current stimulus unit to the two output electrodes. b Object and body stimuli presented during the mental transformation task. c Each trial consisted of a 15 s galvanic stimulation. After an accommodation period of 3 s (with Wxation point), eight pictures of either the plant or the body were shown in a completely darkened and noise-isolated room. The frame of the computer screen was covered in order to narrow the visual Weld to the intended visual scene and to eliminate any horizontal and vertical reference cues.
To measure the subjective visual vertical, a white dotted line (15 cm in length subtending 8.6° of the visual Weld) was presented on the screen. The initial position in which the line was shown was either tilted counterclockwise (two trials) or clockwise (two trials) at a randomly chosen angle (in the range of §4° with respect to the gravitational vertical).
In the mental transformation task, greyscale pictures of a plant and of a human body (seen from the back) were used (Fig. 1b) . The plant had a big leaf extended to the right or to the left alternatively while the human body showed either an extended left or right arm. Both stimuli subtended 9° and 11.3° of visual Weld in the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. Matlab (Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA) with Psychophysics Toolbox v2.54 (Brainard 1997; Pelli 1997 ) was used for stimulus presentation. Stimuli were presented in six diVerent orientations (0°, 60°, 120°, 180°, 240°, and 300°) in the picture plane. We chose transformation in the roll plane because GVS is known to predominantly evoke illusory motion of both body and visual Weld in the roll plane (Fitzpatrick and Day 2004) . Picture rotations of 240° and 300° correspond to counterclockwise rotations of 120° and 60°, respectively.
One experimental session lasted about one hour and consisted of 4 blocks. Each block consisted of a diVerent type of stimulation (GVS with anode left or right; sham stimulation with anode left or right). The sequence of blocks varied randomly across subjects. Within each block the following procedure was used:
First, the subjective visual vertical was measured. The line was presented four times while a rectangular current of 10 s was applied. During these 10 s, subjects were asked to move the line (in 0.2°-steps) clockwise or counterclockwise by pressing a corresponding right or left keyboard button until they judged the line to be vertically oriented. After the 10 s trial ended, subjects closed their eyes until the start of the next trial to avoid any kind of visual feedback of their previous visual vertical judgment that could have inXuenced the subsequent trial.
Next, we carried out the mental transformation task (six trials with body pictures; six trials with plant pictures). During each trial, GVS was applied for 15 s (during which the visual stimuli were presented) and followed by a 10 s rest period without galvanic stimulation (Fig. 1c) . Each trial contained 8 pictures. The Wrst stimulus was presented after an accommodation phase of 3 s in each trial (see Mars et al. 2005) . Each stimulus was presented for 300 ms and a Wxation point was shown between stimuli (interstimulus interval: 1.5 s). Blocks of body and plant pictures as well as the sequence of pictures within the trial were randomized. In total, this design led to eight stimuli repetitions for each angle of each object per stimulation (total of 96 stimulus presentations per block). Subjects had to indicate with their right hand as fast and as accurately as possible if the right or left hand/leaf was extended. Response time and accuracy were collected with a response box. Two practice sessions were done at the beginning of the experiment to minimize training eVects during the diVerent blocks of the experimental session.
After the experimental sessions, participants Wlled out a questionnaire focused on determining the strategies they used in the mental transformation task (modiWed after Zacks and Tversky 2005) . For body and for plant pictures, subjects were asked whether they had performed an objectbased transformation (I imagined the picture turning), an egocentric transformation (I imagined myself turning), another strategy, or no strategy at all.
Subjects were also given a detailed questionnaire that inquired about the subjective experiences during GVS (modiWed and extended after Stephan et al. 2005; MacDougall et al. 2006 , see electronic supplementary material). This questionnaire included questions about strength, direction and temporal characteristics of the illusory visual Weld and own body movements as well as the aVected body part(s) in the latter. Additionally, we asked subjects about the strength of the experienced side eVects during GVS as previously described in the literature (the questionnaire included a modiWed version of the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire of Lane and Kennedy 1988) . In total, subjects answered 65 questions.
The mean subjective visual vertical (in degrees) was calculated by averaging the four consecutive values for each type of stimulation and each participant.
For the mental transformation task, two dependent variables were measured: the error rate and the response time (in ms). Since the mean error rate over all conditions was less than 2.5%, only response times were further analysed. Response times of correct trials were analysed using repeated-measures analyses of variance (ANOVAs) with the variables Type of Stimulation (GVS, sham stimulation), Side of Stimulation (right, left), Object (body, plant), Stimulus Orientation (clockwise, counterclockwise) and Angle of Rotation (0°, 60°, 120°, 180°) as within-subject factors.
Supplementary ANOVAs were performed with the mental transformation Strategy (object-based transformation, egocentric transformation) used by the subjects as a betweensubject factor and the above mentioned within-subject factors. Post-hoc paired t tests were used to further analyse the signiWcant eVects on the ANOVAs. Results were considered statistically signiWcant for P < 0.05.

All subjects reported vestibular eVects during GVS. Most subjects reported a sensation of body tilt in the roll (72%) or yaw (18%) planes, mainly felt for the head. Motion of the visual Weld was experienced either as swaying (36%), translation to a Wxed distance (36%), or rotation to a Wxed angle (55%). With respect to the temporal characteristics of the perceived body motion, subjects reported GVS sensations as continuous (36%), progressive (27%), intermittent (18%), decreasing (18%), or other (55%).
Concerning side eVects of GVS (Table 1) , 91% of the subjects reported mild or moderate sensations of pain on the skin at the site of the anode. Frequent side eVects were general discomfort (55%), mild vertigo (55%), eyestrain (55%), blurred vision (36%), headache (36%), head fullness (36%) and diYculty concentrating (36%).
Without stimulation, the subjective visual vertical was judged at 0.4° § 0.9°. This was systematically changed by right (0.5° clockwise) and left GVS (0.4° counterclockwise, Fig. 2 ). Repeated-measures ANOVA on the visual vertical deviations showed a main eVect of the Side of Stimulation [F (1,10) = 8.4, P < 0.05] and an interaction eVect of Type of Stimulation £ Side of Stimulation [F (1,10) = 5.7, P < 0.05] indicating that the diVerent types of stimulation inXuenced the perceived visual vertical diVerently as function of the stimulated side. Detailed analyses showed that right GVS caused a signiWcant tilt of the perceived visual vertical towards the anode (clockwise tilt) compared to the right sham stimulation (t = 3.13, P < 0.05) as well as to the condition without stimulation (t = 3.07, P < 0.05). Finally, right and left sham stimulations did not signiWcantly inXuence the perception of the visual vertical.
To test our hypotheses we Wrst employed a Wve-way ANOVA with the within-subject factors Type of Stimulation (GVS, sham stimulation), Side of Stimulation (left, right), Object (human, plant), Stimulus Orientation (clockwise, counterclockwise) and Angle of Rotation (60°, 120°).

We found a signiWcant eVect of Angle of rotation [F (1,10) = 83.82, P < 0.001] showing longer response times for 120°c ompared to 60° rotations. No main eVect of Stimulus Orientation was observed suggesting symmetrical response times for clockwise and counterclockwise rotations [F (1,10) = 3.00, P = 0.12]. The main eVect of the Angle of Rotation remained highly signiWcant when all six angles were taken 1 The upright (0°) and the upside-down conditions (180°) were not included in this Wrst ANOVA since they cannot be assigned to either a clockwise or counterclockwise Stimulus Orientation and subjects reported having used other strategies than mental rotation for the 180°angle (see below). into account [F (1,10) = 81.18, P < 0.001] (Fig. 3) . The mental rotation rates were 653°/s for bodies and 680°/s for objects which are similar to previously reported rates for mental transformation tasks (Cooper 1975 ).
Our data indicate that mental transformation of the plant (mean response time: 553 § 50 ms) was more diYcult than mental transformation of the body [538 § 49 ms; F (1,10) = 31.21, P < 0.001]. This is also in agreement with results of our questionnaire, showing that 55% of the subjects considered mental transformation of the plant more diYcult than that of the body while only 18% reported the opposite. Fig. 4b ]. Together, these data suggest that only the right GVS interferes with mental transformation and that this eVect is observed only for the most diYcult object (plant) and angle of rotation (120°).

As vestibular processing has been linked to egocentric-perspective changes and our subjects showed individual diVerences with respect to the strategy that was employed for mental transformation, we also tested whether interference of GVS with mental transformation diVered in subjects employing an egocentric mental transformation than in subjects employing an object-based mental transformation. In the questionnaire on mental transformation strategies 55% of the subjects (n = 6) described that they performed an object-based mental transformation (imagined turning of the image) for pictures of body and plant. The remaining subjects (n = 5) reported an egocentric mental transformation (imagined turning of themselves). All subjects reported having used the same strategy for the pictures of the body and the plant. In addition, 45% of the subjects (n = 5) reported spontaneous use of a diVerent strategy for pictures presented upside-down (180°) than for the other angles by just mirroring the body/plant in respect to the median vertical axis of the picture and pressing on the left button if the arm/leaf was on the right, and vice-versa. We thus analyzed the performance of both subpopulations of subjects by including Strategy as a between-subject factor in the above-described ANOVAs. For right GVS, we found a signiWcant interaction Strategy £ Type of stimulation [F (1,9) = 7.10, P < 0.05] for pictures of plant (Fig. 5) , and a trend for pictures of body [F (1,9) = 4.10, P = 0.074]. Post-hoc analyses suggest that the described interfering eVect of right GVS on the mental transformation exists mainly in subjects employing an egocentric mental transformation strategy because only this subpopulation showed a signiWcant diVerence between GVS and sham stimulation (t = 2.9, P < 0.05, compared to t = 0.6, P = 0.55).
This study investigated the inXuence of vestibular processing and illusory own body motion on mental transformation. Performance in mental transformation tasks during GVS were compared to performance during sham stimulation (a control condition for attentional inXuence). We tested whether there is an eVect of right versus left GVS on mental transformation, whether a diVerent inXuence of GVS exists for egocentric versus object-based mental transformation, and whether speciWc directional eVects exist when the direction of illusory self-motion and mental transformation are congruent.
Our data show increased response times for objects presented at larger angles of rotation when applying right anodal GVS. We could not observe the directional eVects of GVS on mental transformation as reported by Mast and Meissner (2004) . This speaks for a more general eVect of GVS on mental transformation due to overlapping and interfering cortical networks. A similar decrease in performance due to vestibular-spatial interaction eVects has been found in other studies that used vestibular stimulation in combination with speciWc cognitive tasks Mars et al. 2005) . Brain imaging studies suggest that areas in the posterior parietal cortex involved in mental transformation (Kosslyn et al. 1998; Zacks et al. 1999) are also activated during GVS-induced illusory body motion (Lobel et al. 1998; Stephan et al. 2005) . Therefore, GVS activation of these areas presumably interferes and impairs mental transformation, corroborating Wndings of Mast et al. (2006) who showed that caloric vestibular stimulation had a disruptive eVect on mental transformation but not on a cognitive control task not involving spatial imagery.
Our data suggest that the disturbing eVects of GVS are only present in subjects who performed egocentric mental transformation and not object-based mental transformation. This suggests that mental transformation simulates the properties of physical egocentric transformation, since real body movements involve vestibular processes whereas physical object transformation does not. The results are in line with previous observations showing that egocentric mental transformation is inXuenced by actual vestibular stimula- Fig. 4 InXuence of the side of stimulation. The histograms show the mean response time in milliseconds ( §standard error to the mean, vertical bars) for the plant presented at 60° and 120° (averaged over clockwise and counterclockwise stimuli) during (a) right and (b) left anodal galvanic vestibular stimulation compared to right and left sham stimulation tion during physical body rotations (Mast and Meissner 2004) and that egocentric mental transformation inXuences vestibulo-ocular functions (Rodinov et al. 2004) . DiVering from earlier Wndings (Parsons 1987; Zacks and Tversky 2005) , the strategy our subjects used did not depend on the visually presented stimuli (plant or human body). Our subjects indicated the use of either an object-based mental transformation (55%) or an egocentric perspective-based mental transformation (45%) for both types of pictures. This suggests that mental transformation depends more on idiosyncratic selection of a strategy involving either egocentric or allocentric references, thereby corroborating evidence from studies on spatial navigation (Wraga et al. 2005) and theories of vicarious processing in spatial cognition (Ohlmann and Marendaz 1991) .
What are the anatomical substrates of speciWc interactions between GVS and egocentric mental transformation? Several neuroimaging studies in healthy subjects have shown that cerebral activations associated with egocentric and object-based strategies can be diVerentiated during spatial navigation (Jordan et al. 2002; Hartley et al. 2003) and mental transformation (Zacks and Tversky 2005) . The exact anatomical location of these mental transformation processes is still controversial and seems to depend on additional variables such as sex, handedness, task diYculty and the control task (Kosslyn et al. 1998; Jordan et al. 2002) . Nevertheless, as described in a meta-analysis by Zacks and Michelon (2005) , object-based transformation would rely predominantly on unilateral right fronto-parietal cortex, while egocentric transformation would involve a more bilateral network (temporo-parieto-occipital junction; superior parietal lobule) with either right or left hemispheric predominance (Vallar et al. 1999; Zacks et al. 1999; Creem et al. 2001; Vogeley and Fink 2003; Blanke et al. 2005) . Thus, the more bilateral cortical network activated by right GVS (see below) may interfere more strongly with mental transformation employing egocentric transformation.
The results of this study indicate that only the right GVS interfered with mental transformation. This Wnding was further conWrmed by the eVects on the subjective visual vertical (only right GVS led to a signiWcant deviation, see below). This selective eVect was not due to diVerent current amplitudes applied during right versus left GVS. We therefore suggest that either a functional asymmetry of the peripheral vestibular apparatus exists or, more likely, a set of common neural mechanisms between right GVS and mental transformation exists that may be responsible for this eVect.
Concerning the functional asymmetry of the peripheral vestibular system, several studies have suggested asymmetrical eVects of left and right GVS even on basic parameters such as eye movements and postural control (Quark et al. 1998; Bent et al. 2000) . However, the data on such peripheral asymmetries are contradictory, with some authors reporting a dominance of the left (Lacour et al. 1974) , some the right (Quark et al. 1998) vestibular apparatus, or even a symmetrical sensitivity for both ears (Zink et al. 1998) .
With respect to the hypothesis of a set of common neural mechanisms between right GVS and mental transformation, our result may be due to more extensive overlap and interference of brain regions activated by right GVS (as opposed to left) with brain regions involved in mental transformation. In an fMRI study, Fink et al. (2003) compared the cortical activation associated with right versus left GVS using a similar stimulation protocol as in the present study. Fig. 5 InXuence of the mental transformation strategy. The histograms show the mean response time in milliseconds ( §standard error to the mean, vertical bars) for the plant presented at 60° and 120°( averaged over clockwise and counterclockwise stimuli) for subjects using (a) an object-based versus (b) an egocentric mental transformation strategy These authors found that right anodal GVS involved a bilateral hemispheric activation of the superior temporal gyrus, posterior insula, anterior inferior parietal cortex, as well as right lateral occipito-parietal activation, whereas activations during left anodal GVS were conWned to the right hemisphere only (superior temporal gyrus, posterior insula, anterior inferior parietal cortex). As mental transformation has been shown to rely on bilateral parietal and temporooccipital activations (bodies: Zacks et al. 1999; Creem et al. 2001; Blanke et al. 2005 , objects: Kosslyn et al. 1998 Vingerhoets et al. 2001) , we speculate that bilateral activations due to right GVS interfere more strongly with bilateral activations during mental transformation in superior temporal gyrus, posterior insula, and inferior parietal cortex. Interference of right GVS at these sites might thus lead to the observed decrease in task performance.
The diVerential eVects between left and right GVS on mental transformations in the present study were conWrmed by the results of the visual vertical judgments. Only right anodal GVS inXuenced the perception of the vertical signiWcantly, evidenced by a clockwise deviation of the subjective visual vertical. Given that the amplitude of the visual vertical deviation depends on current intensity (Mars et al. 2005) , and that we used small current amplitudes compared to previous studies, our values appear to be consistent with that of previous Wndings (Zink et al. 1998; Mars et al. 2005) . A signiWcantly stronger inXuence of right GVS on the subjective visual vertical has also been reported in patients with right parietal damage (Saj et al. 2006) . Moreover, the brain regions involved in the visual vertical judgment [a bilateral frontoparieto-occipital network including inferior frontal cortex, anterior insula and posterior parietal cortex (Lopez et al. 2005) ] would be more aVected by right than left GVS.
While this study revealed disruptive eVects of GVS on mental transformation, the eVects were rather small and speciWc. We believe that this is mainly due to the low intensity and heterogeneous eVects of GVS and/or due to a too low task diYculty (error rate smaller than 2.5%). The large number of stimulus repetitions required the use of a relatively weak mean current of about 1 mA, probably resulting in a reduced strength of overall illusory body motion. The two previous studies that showed vestibular inXuence on mental transformation used actual body rotation (Mast and Meissner 2004) or caloric vestibular stimulation (Mast et al. 2006) , both of which yielded stronger vestibular sensations. Additionally, important inter-individual diVerences in the direction, amplitude and temporal characteristics of the illusory movements due to GVS were reported. MacDougall et al. (2002) suggested that these diVerences result from the unnatural stimulation of all semicircular and otolith organs simultaneously and from individual diVerences in the interpretation of these uncommon vestibular stimuli. The fact that not all subjects reported illusory movement could also account for the lack of direction-speciWc eVects in this study. This is further confounded by the fact that subjects used diVerent mental rotation strategies, and that the direction of the mental transformation diVered across subjects. For example, for a stimulus angle of 60° clockwise, subjects using an egocentric strategy would imagine turning their body rightwards while subjects using an object-based transformation would imagine turning the picture leftwards.
Although the interaction between GVS and mental transformation was not as strong as assumed based on previous literature, this study reveals novel results concerning the contribution of the vestibular system to high level spatial and bodily processing. The results suggest that GVS may impair demanding mental transformation tasks. This is mainly true for right GVS and for egocentric mental transformation, suggesting a shared neural processing in the posterior parietal cortex.
Based on these results several implications for further studies can be derived: Studies on the eVects of GVS and bodily and spatial processing should consider sham stimulation as it is routinely used in transcranial magnetic stimulation studies. Task complexity should generally be high enough in order to observe potential GVS eVects, and these eVects should further be investigated by systematically manipulating task diYculty. Since we found diVerences between left and right GVS, future studies should also investigate GVS over both mastoids separately. Moreover, for mental transformation tasks it would be interesting to assess and manipulate mental transformation strategies, since they seem to rely on diVerent neural processes. Finally, to test our hypothesis of a shared brain mechanism between right GVS and mental transformation it would be important to combine neuroimaging with GVS as done previously to demonstrate this common neural substrate between GVS and line bisection .
for their health benefits. Garlic is known for its ability to modulate the immune system (Venkatesh, 2018) , suppress cancerous cell growth, reduce serum cholesterol levels and reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases (Madden, Krehbiel, & Clarke, 2017) .
In addition, garlic has immense antibacterial activity (Ain et al., 2017) . S-Allylcysteine (SAC) a bioactive compound produced in large amounts during garlic aging and is responsible for the multiple pharmacological activities of garlic. SAC is formed by the enzymatic hydrolysis of γ-glutamyl-S-allyl cysteine by γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP) (Kodera et al., 2002) .
Cirsium setidens Nakai has also been used as a traditional oriental medicine for centuries. It is a perennial herb belonging to the family Compositae and is distributed mainly in the Gangwon Province of Korea . The plant has been used for treating edema, bleeding, and hemoptysis since it contains bioactive compounds such as hispidulin 7-O-neohesperidoside, pectolinarin, luteolin, and apigenin (Thao et al., 2011) . Earlier studies have proven the biological effects of C. setidens Nakai, including antioxidant properties (Lee, Heo, Li, Lee, & Wang, 2008) , hepatoprotective activities (Yoo, Nam, Kim, Choi, & Park, 2008) , and activity against nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (Noh et al., 2013) .
Fermentation of medicinal foods with lactic acid bacteria has been shown to prevent high fat diet-induced hepatic steatosis in mice (Lee, Lee, Yu, Lee, & Cho, 2017) and improve anticancer activities (Kim et al., 2018) . There is, however, limited information on whether a fermented blend of garlic and C. setidens Nakai beverage would result in any health effects. In the quest to prepare a functional beverage from a combination of garlic and C. setidens Nakai, we ascertained the antioxidant-and immune-enhancing abilities of various blends of garlic and C. setidens Nakai to find which blend had the best antioxidant activity, cell proliferation ability, nitric oxide-stimulating activity, and the cytokines the best blend induces.

Trichloroacetic acid (TCA), gallic acid, De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe (MRS) broth, Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM), fetal bovine serum (FBS), and Folin-Ciocalteu's reagent were procured from Sigma-Aldrich, Inc. Dinitrophenyl hydrazine (DNPH) was from ACROS Organics; hydrogen peroxide, methanol, and FeCl 3 were purchased from BDH Chemicals Ltd.; and thiourea, CuSO 4 .5H 2 O, H 2 SO 4 , sodium carbonate, AlCl 3 , potassium acetate, Tris-HCl buffer, FeSO 4 , potassium ferricyanide, and ferric chloride were of analytical grade while the water was glass-distilled.
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), sodium nitrite (NaNO 2 ), and Griess reagent (0.1% N-(1-naphthyl)ethylenediamine dihydrochloride, 1% sulfanilamide in 5% phosphoric acid) were all prepared in-house from reagents purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Korea. Viscozyme, cellulase, amylase, and protease were supplied by Erom Company Limited.

Leuconostoc mesenteroides KCTC 13302 was obtained from the Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Korea, and grown in MRS broth for 36 hr at 37°C. The culture was centrifuged at 6,000 g for 15 min to obtain the cell pellets and washed twice with double-distilled water. The cells were then diluted with distilled water and stored at 4 degrees until use.
RAW 264.7 cells (a mouse macrophages cell line) were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection and cultured in DMEM supplemented with FBS (10%), D-glucose (3.5 mg/ml), sodium pyruvate (100 mM), L-glutamine (2 mM), penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin (100 μg/ml), and amphotericin B (250 μg/ml) at 37°C and 5% CO 2 .
Garlic (Allium sativum) and C. setidens Nakai were obtained from Erom Company Limited, Korea. Leuconostoc mesenteroides KCTC 13302 was chosen for the fermentation process because it produced the strongest biologically active garlic product in our previous experiments (data not shown).
Garlic was peeled, washed, and dried in a laminar flow hood (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and grounded using a Vitamix 5200 blender (VitaMix Corporation). A portion (100 g) of the ground garlic was weighed with an Ohaus Scout electronic balance (Flinn Scientific) and mixed with 250 ml of distilled water. The mixture was steamed at 100°C for 1 hr and allowed to cool to 50°C. Cellulase (0.5 ml) was added amidst stirring for 30 min after which 0.75 ml of protease was added for 1 hr. Amylase (1.25 ml) was then added and heated for 1 hr at 70°C. The enzymes were then inactivated by increasing the temperature to 90°C for 30 min, and the mixture was concentrated to obtain 7°Bx. The sample was concentrated to 17% (v/v). The sample was adjusted to 10°Bx and freeze-dried.
For C. setidens Nakai preparation, the plant material was extracted with water twice at 90°C and filtered. The sample was then concentrated to 10°Bx, freeze-dried, and stored at −20°C until use.
Different proportions of garlic and C. setidens Nakai were mixed in the ratios 90:10, 80:20, 50:50, and 100:0, respectively, and autoclaved.
One portion of the different ratios of garlic and C. setidens Nakai 

Dried samples (200 g) of C. setidens were extracted with water, filtered, and freeze-dried to obtain 20 g of the dry extract. All the samples (single and blends) were dissolved in methanol and filtered using a 0.45-μm syringe filter and analyzed using HPLC. A Waters The injection volume was 10 μL, and flow rate was 1 ml/ min. The UV spectra were recorded at 254 nm for quantification of flavonoids. All injections were performed in triplicate.
Validation of the HPLC method for pectolinarin and pectolinarigenin as standard compounds was determined by LOD and LOQ. 
Stock solutions (1 mg/ml) of pectolinarin and pectolinarigenin were prepared in MeOH, and the solution content was successively reduced to 10% in order to create different concentrations for calibration curves. The calibration curves for pectolinarin and pectolinarigenin were calculated using peak area (Y), concentration (X, mg/ml), and mean value (n = 3) ± SD (Table 2) .

The total phenolic content was determined according to the method of Singleton, Orthofer, and Lamuela-Raventós (1999) with slight modifications. Samples of the extracts (200 mg) were dissolved in 1 ml of distilled water and filtered, and 100 μl was oxidized with 2.5 ml of 10% Folin-Ciocalteu's reagent (v/v) inside a test tube. The samples were then neutralized by adding 2.0 ml of 7.5% sodium carbonate. The reaction mixture was incubated for 40 min at 45°C, and the absorbance was measured at 765 nm with an Eppendorf Biospectrometer (Eppendorf Biospectrometer® fluorescence, Eppendorf Korea Ltd.). The total phenolic content of the beverages was subsequently estimated from a standard curve of absorbance of gallic acid and reported as gallic acid equivalent (GAE) ( Table 3) .

Cirsium setidens Nakai
TA B L E 1 List of samples and their description
The total flavonoid content of the extracts was determined by the aluminum chloride colorimetric method (Chang, Yang, Wen, & Chern, 2002) . In brief, 50 μl of the samples (1 mg/ml ethanol) was made up to 1 ml with methanol, mixed with 4 ml of distilled water and then 0.3 ml of 5% NaNO 2 solution; 0.3 ml of 10% AlCl 3 solution was added after 5 min of incubation, and the mixture was allowed to stand for 6 min. Then, 2 ml of 1 M NaOH solution was added, and the final volume of the mixture was brought to 10 ml with doubledistilled water. The mixture was allowed to stand for 15 min, and absorbance was measured at 510 nm. The total flavonoid content was estimated from a calibration curve, and the result was expressed as milligram quercetin equivalent (QE) per g dry weight (Table 3) .
The reducing properties of the extracts were determined by assessing the ability of the extracts to reduce FeCl3 solution as described by Zhao et al. (2008) . An aliquot (2.5 ml) of the aqueous extract was mixed with 2.5 ml 200 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.6) and 2.5 ml 1% potassium ferricyanide. The mixture was incubated at 50°C for 20 min, and then, 2.5 ml 10% trichloroacetic acid (v/v) was added. This mixture was centrifuged at 45 g for 10 min, and 5 ml of the supernatant was mixed with an equal volume of water followed by the addition of 1 ml 0.1% ferric chloride (w/v). The absorbance was measured at 593 nm with an Eppendorf Biospectrometer.
Ascorbic acid was used as a positive control. The ferric reducing antioxidant property was subsequently calculated (Figure 1 ).
Hydrogen atom or electron-donation ability of the beverage extracts was measured from the bleaching of the purple-colored methanol solution of DPPH. The free radical scavenging abilities of the extracts against DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) free radical were evaluated as already described (Gyamfi, Yonamine, & Aniya, 1999) . FI TRF, USA). The absorbance at 450 nm was subtracted from the absorbance at 690 nm. The ability of the extracts to promote or suppress the growth of the cells was interpreted as their cytotoxicity (Figure 3 ).
The ability of the extracts to stimulate NO production in RAW 264.7 cells was performed as previously described (Green et al., 1982) . Briefly, RAW 264.7 cells (99 μl, plated at 10 6 cells/ml) were treated with extracts (1 μl). Nitrite was then measured after 24 hr using the Griess reaction. The culture media of the RAW 264.7 cells (80 μl) were mixed with 80 μL of Griess reagent, and its absorbance was measured at 550 nm using an Eppendorf Biospectrometer. The nitrite concentrations in the culture media were determined by comparing them with a NaNO 2 standard curve. LPS (1 μl) was diluted with DMEM, (0.05 μg/ml) and used as the positive control, and distilled water was the solvent control. Each concentration was assayed three times ( Figure 4a ).
The ability of S6 extract to induce TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-10 production in RAW 264.7 cells cultures was performed as previously described 
All experiments were carried out in triplicates, and the results were plants have been shown to be directly related to their potential antioxidant capacities in many studies (Demir, Yildiz, Alpaslan, & Hayaloglu, 2014; Zhang et al., 2014) . Garlic is rich in phenolic compounds and SAC which have strong antioxidant properties (Alarcón-Flores, Romero-González, Vidal, & Frenich, 2014) as well as antihypertensive, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer activities (Fratianni et al., 2016) . C. setidens Nakai contains pectolinarin (a glycoside) and pectolinarigenin (an aglycone) which have strong anti-inflammatory properties (Jeong et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2014) .
These anti-inflammatory compounds are, however, bound and are not bioavailable as shown in Table 2 . Therefore, fermenting them with L. mesenteroides enabled the release of pectolinarin and pectolinarigenin. This accounts for the high pectolinarin and pectolinarigenin contents in fermented samples relative to the unfermented samples containing C. setidens Nakai. Fermentation of garlic also significantly increased the levels of SAC from 1.8 ± 0.1 mg/g to 4.43 ± 0.67 mg/g (Table 4 ). Furthermore, phenolic and flavonoid compounds generally increased with fermentation (Table 3) . Our results agree with an earlier study in which the phenolic content of fermented okra seeds increased significantly relative to unfermented seeds (Adetuyi & Ibrahim, 2014) . This might be due to the ability of the LAB enzymes to hydrolyze the samples to release bound phenolic and flavonoid compounds during the fermentation process.
Since phenolic and flavonoid contents of plants have been associated with their antioxidant potencies, the Fe 3+ reducing abilities of the samples were tested (Figure 1 ). The reducing ability of a compound generally depends on the presence of reduc tones which exert the antioxidant activity by breaking the free radical chain via donating a hydrogen atom (Pavithra & Vadivukkarasi, 2015) . Results from this study demonstrated that sample S8 had a higher Fe 3+ to Fe 2+ reducing ability followed by S6, and this could be due to the reductones released during the fermentation process.
DPPH, a stable free radical, accepts hydrogen radicals or electrons from donors to become stable diamagnetic molecules. The degree to which a sample decolorizes the dark color of the DPPH radical solution indicates its scavenging potential. In this study, all the extracts scavenged DPPH radicals in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 2 ). Consistent with our observations in the Fe 3+ reducing ability test, sample S8 showed a very high DPPH scavenging activity followed by S6. Since the total polyphenols and flavonoids in the fermented samples increased relative to their unfermented counterparts (Table 3) , the high DPPH radical scavenging activity and reducing ability observed could be attributed to the polyphenols and flavonoids released during the fermentation process.
To test for the potential of the extracts to enhance or suppress cell proliferation, XTT{2,3-bis (2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide innersalt} assay was performed on RAW 264.7 cells (Figure 3) . It was observed that none of the extracts at the concentrations tested suppressed RAW 264.7 cell proliferation.
Generally, all the extracts enhanced cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner implying that the extracts are nontoxic. The highest cell proliferation was, however, observed after RAW 264.7 cells were treated with 200 µg/ml of S6 and S8. Treating the cells with 200 µg/ml of S6 and S8 resulted in no significant differences in cell proliferation (p > 0.05). Lu et al. (Lu et al., 2014) have reported that 50 µM of pectolinarigenin effectively suppresses the growth of MCF-7 cells (a breast cancer cell line), and our study has shown that the extracts are not toxic to normal cells. This therefore implies that our beverage is safe for consumption and may inhibit tumor growth.
To test the ability of the beverage blends to stimulate the immune system, their ability to induce NO production in RAW 264.7 macrophages was studied as these cells constitute the first line of host defenses against infections (Mehta, Ashkar, & Mossman, 2012) .
When NO is generated, it is easily oxidized to nitrite and stored in intracellular and extracellular fluids (Green et al., 1982) . Thus, in experiments, the levels of nitrite (a stable product of NO) are usually measured to reflect the amount of NO (Green et al., 1982) . In macrophages, macrophage-inducible NO synthase is mainly responsible for NO production in response to various stimuli (Tripathi, Tripathi, Kashyap, & Singh, 2007) . NO then acts as an intercellular messenger and is a versatile player in the immune system. In our study, all the concentrations tested induce NO to various extents in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 4a ). S8 and S6 induced similar levels (the highest levels) of NO in the culture supernatant. Even lower concentrations (100 μg/ml) of S6 and S8 induced NO production and this agrees with an earlier study which reported that 100 μg/ml of a plant extract strongly induced macNOS mRNA expression (Imanishi et al., 2004) . The ability of the extracts to induce NO secretion by RAW 264.7 cells may reflect the potential to modulate NO-based strategies for pathogen-mediated immune response for treating infections and tumors.
Due to the high cost of C. setidens Nakai, it was more economical to produce S6 which contained only 20% Cirsium setidens Nakai relative to S8 which contained 50% C. setidens Nakai. Therefore, since they showed comparable effects (cell proliferation ability and NO stimulation), only S6 was selected for further studies. Activated macrophages are known to produce proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-alpha and IL-1β which play critical roles in regulating immune cells. Both cytokines induce fever, inflammation, and apoptosis and inhibit tumorigenesis and viral replication (Arango Duque & Descoteaux, 2014) . For this reason, we measured the levels of TNF-alpha produced after RAW 264.7 cells were treated with S6 ( Figure 4b ). TNF-alpha levels were significantly increased in a dose-dependent manner relative to the control (p < 0.05). However, although IL-1β levels increased (relative to the control treatment), they were not significantly different (p > 0.05) when the concentrations of S6 were increased (Figure 4c ).
Activated macrophages can also produce IL-10 which plays a key role in limiting immune-mediated pathology during many diseases. This anti-inflammatory cytokine ameliorates the excessive production of TNF-α which can result in immunopathology during infections (Couper, Blount, & Riley, 2008) . In this study, treatment of 
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
The study did not involve any human or animal testing.
Deog-Hwan Oh https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7472-0436
Anatolia is the main centre of Salvia species in Asia, and its 89 species, half of which are endemic, were determined in Anatolia's natural vegetation. Salvia fruticosa Mill., being one of the commercial species with its essential oil that is over %1, spreads in Mediterranean mainly in Turkey and Greece [1] - [4] .
In Turkey, the leaves of Anatolian sage (Salvia fruticosa Mill.) are used instead of medical sage (Salvia officinals L.). Its leaves resemble medical sage's leaves in terms of chemical structure and treatment effects. Its essential oil has gastric, gastral, diuretic and saccharic effects. Externally, it can be used as wound healer and antiseptic [5] and [6] . In addition to these features, it is informed that it is among the plants of sage having the best antioxidant activity [7] . Along with internal consumption, sage (Salvia fruticosa Mill.) is gathered from natural vegetation from the west of Turkey and is exported being dry [8] . Related to the increasing export, efforts for the plant's production have increased in recent years.
Sage production can be made by the separation of secondary stems growing from seed, cutting and roots. Being an effective method in producing many plants, vegetative production with cuttings is seen as an attractive method for plant production industry [9] . Cuttings to which hormone is applied generally root much more rapidly than those to which hormones is not applied and construct a stronger root system, thus moulding in the lower parts of cuttings diminishes with accelerating of rooting. In their study they conducted with different species of Lamiaceae family, [10] detected the highest root height and root number values in Salvia fruticosa species in 3000 ppm IBA application for a period of 5 minutes.
In this study, it was aimed at determining the effects of different hormones and hormone doses in S. fruticosa cuttings upon the growth of seedling root.
In the research, Anatolian sage (S. fruticosa Mill.) grown in the previous years in the experiment fields of Namık Kemal University Agricultural Faculty Field Crops was used as material. In the premergence phase, for three different hormones and five different doses, totally 1875 cuttings including 125 cuttings peculiar to each dose were obtained by observing the plant growth. Cuttings were obtained in the form of 3-5 internodes in 12-15 cm length in the morning hours. In the doses in which NAA and IBA are 1. 0 , 2. 60, 3. 120, 4. 180, 5. 240 ppm, whereas IAA is 1. 0, 2. 100, 3. 200, 4. 300, 5. 400 ppm, they were prepared in pure water by dissolving in the laboratory. The obtained cuttings were planted in the greenhouse after being waited in the hormone solutions for 24 hours. The experiment was organised according to split parcels experimental design. In the greenhouses, pearlite was used as rooting environment. By unravelling cuttings after 30 days, number of rooted cutting, root number per cutting, root length and their weight were determined. In the assessment of the collected data, JMP statistical programme was used.
In the study where NAA, IAA and IBA hormones and these hormones' five different levels were applied, at the level of 0.01 in terms of root weight and root number, hormone doses, hormone x hormone interactions, at the level of 0.01 among the hormones and hormone x hormone interactions in terms of root length and at the level of 0.05 among the hormone doses, significant differences were determined.
The effects of NAA, IAA and IBA hormones and these hormones' five different doses on Anatolia sage's root weight are given in Fig. 1 and Table 1 . while hormone x hormone doses interactions are given in Table 2 . The highest root weight values were obtained from NAA and IAA hormones, and the root weight of cuttings which NAA and IAA were applied to was notable high than those to which IBA was applied. While root weight in cuttings in which hormone was not applied was 1.824 g, significant increases in root weight were seen with hormone applications. While root weight in the lowest hormone application was 1.822 g, this value was 3.051 in the highest hormone application. While the highest root weight was obtained from the highest hormone level, significant differences between cuttings to which hormone was applied and the low dose applications. When the effects of hormone x hormone doses interactions on root weight was examined, it was seen that the highest root weight value was obtained from 240 ppm dose of NAA applcation, which was followed by 300, 400 and 200 ppm doses of IAA. The lowest root weights were obtained from those whcih hormone was not applied to and the low dose applications of IBA and IAA.
The effects of three different hormones and these hormones' five different doses on the root number of sage cuttings are given Fig. 2 and Table 2 . Hormone applications and root numbers changed between 44.000-70.750, and considerable root numbers were obtaibed from IAA applications and NAA and IBA applications. Between NAA and IBA applications, no difference was seen in terms of the quality examined. With the increase of hormone doses, significant increases were seen in root numbers. While the highest root number values (77.397) were obtained from the highest hormone dose application, the lowest root numbers were obtained from cuttings to which hormone was not applied and to which the lowest hormone dose was applied (28.000 and 32.3889). As can be seen from Table 2 , the highest root numbers were obtained from 300, 400 and 200 ppm doses of IAA application, and this is followed by 240 ppm dose application of IAA and IBA. 
The effects of different hormones and hormone doses on root length are given in Fig. 3 . and while hormone x hormone interactions are given in Table 4 . The longest root was obtained from NAA and IAA applications while the lowest root values were obtained from IBA application. Root lengths changed between 10.487-11.416 cm according to the applied hormone doses, and the highest hormone values were obtained from the highest hormone doses. As can be seen from Table 4 , values concerning root length changed between 9.610-12.428. The longest roots were obtained from 60 ppm dose of IAA while the shortest roots were obtained from 200 ppm of IAA. With the dose increase in IBA, it was seen that root lengths increased.
While in hormone x hormone interaction, 11.125 cm root length was measured in the plants to which IAA hormone was not applied, root length in low hormone values diminished, and 240 ppm application gave the same results with those not applied. In NAA application, increases occurred in 60, 120 and 240 ppm applications. In IBA application, especially in 300 and 400 ppm application, notable increases in root length was supplied. The study of [11] , [12] and [10] has similarities with our results. According to the results obtained, IAA application increased root number considerably. While high hormone dose applications caused the notable increase in root weight and root number in all of three hormones, low hormone applications did not affect root length.
The results of an investigation of the stratigraphy and diatom sequence in the Windermere deposits have already been published (Pennington 1943) . The present paper deals with the results of pollen analysis of selected profiles on a transect across the lake, and with the macroscopic plant remains found in the deposits, especially those of late-glacial age. Evidence obtained from these latter investigations has made it possible to date the lake deposits with more accuracy than formerly, and by the light it throws on the late-glacial and post-glacial vegetational sequence in the Windermere basin has made it possible to fit this region into the general picture of the Quaternary history of the British Isles. Further examination of the late-glacial plant-bearing layer described in the previous paper has confirmed the view that it represents a late-glacial climatic amelioration followed by a colder period and then by the final retreat of the ice. A similar layer has been recognized right across Ireland, and its discovery in England was expected. It seems possible that it may be correlated with a similar succession in Denmark and other parts of north-west Europe, and afford a means whereby the British succession could be linked with the Continental succession and De Geer's geochronology; the evidence in favour of such a correlation is put forward in the course of this paper.
The principles of the pollen-analysis method have been described by Godwin (1934) . They apply to subaqueous in the same way as to terrestrial deposits. Samples of the Windermere deposits were obtained by the Jenkin core-sampler, which has already been described (Jenkin, Mortimer & Pennington 1941 ).
It will be apparent that some of the indicator species-Fagus, Carpinus-present in the deposits of southern England are absent in Windermere. This makes it difficult to compare the later stages in the two localities, but the earlier post-glacial stages correspond closely, and the Windermere profile carries back the story into the late-glacial period, the deposits of which have not yet been described from southern England, though they have been recognized, e.g. in Cornwall (Godwin 1940 £) .
It seems unlikely that it will ever be possible to obtain any direct archaeological correlation with the Windermere deposits, but the site is in some ways unique in its association of organic deposits with laminated clays which have every appearance of being true waterlain varves, and hence offer a possibility of applying a geochronological time-scale.
(1) Organic muds While still wet, the muds readily went into suspension in water, though prolonged stirring was necessary with the clays. Plant remains were extracted by sieving this suspension through a fine sieve (0T6 mm. mesh). In nearly all deposits from deep water the plant remains were in a very finely divided state, but this treatment collected all fragments of recognizable size.
For pollen counts, either fresh wet mud or the sieved suspension after centrifuging was treated by a modification of Erdtman's technique, involving oxidation by sodium chlorate followed by hydrolysis with hot acid. After washing, the samples from marginal sites were then mixed with hot safranin-glycerine jelly and stirred; four comparable slides were then made from this suspension. Samples from deep water were, after acid hydrolysis and washing, boiled from 2 to 3 min. in concentrated hydrofluoric acid to remove silica and silic ate sth ey were then washed first in 7 % hydrochloric acid and then in water, and mounted as described. This removal of silica and silicates was necessary in all samples from deep water, in order to obtain a sufficient concentration of pollen for counting. Even so, in some of these samples it was not possible to count more than 100 grains of tree pollen. In most samples, 150 grains of tree pollen were counted.
The results of the pollen counts are expressed as percentages of total tree pollen, Corylus and Salix not being included in the tree pollen. Non-tree pollens, including Corylus and Salix, are expressed as percentages of the total tree pollen.
(2) The laminated clays
In any attem pt to measure or count the varves, the most satisfactory treatment of the laminated clays was found to be to allow the core to dry completely, when a plane surface could be prepared by scraping the clay with a razor. The difference in texture between the summer and winter layers could then be shown up more clearly by treating the core with a mixture of oil and xylol (or petrol) in approximately equal proportions, a method for which I am indebted to Professor T. M. Harris. It was inevitable that cracks and breaks should appear in the core during the drying process; these interfered with the measurement and counting of the varves, and were especially troublesome in the lower part of the laminated clay, where the texture differences were more marked. It seems possible that some technique of impregnation may be found to prevent the cracking on drying. Glycerine, recommended by De Geer, was not satisfactory, since it produced a crumbly texture and made it impossible to prepare the plane surface necessary for microscopic examination. Melted paraffin wax, used by Carruthers (1939) would not penetrate until the clay had dried out sufficiently to initiate cracks; but impregnation with paraffin wax did serve to harden the specimens and render them more portable.
In peat deposits formed subaerially, the pollen content may include a component derived from the vegetation which grew on the actual surface of the peat. Godwin (1940 points out that this local component may materially influence the pollen diagrams from Fenland. The Windermere deposits, on the other hand, must have received all their pollen from the surrounding land, since there is no evidence whatever to suggest that the lake level has at any time since the formation of the lake been lower than it is to-day. The changing composition of the pollen content of the lake deposits can therefore be expected to reflect the forest history of the surrounding land, undisturbed by purely local influences.
There is, however, at some horizons, a marked difference between the pollen spectra of similar age from deep-and shallow-water profiles respectively, suggesting that the marginal pollen rain may be different in composition from that reaching the middle of the lake. Other possible causes of this difference, which related chiefly to the proportions of Pirns to deciduous pollens, are discussed later.
Though the accumulation oflake deposits is not subject to direct climatic effects such as the possible erosion of peat deposits during a dry period, the pollen diagrams show that the rate of accumulation of deposit must have varied considerably both in different parts of the lake at the same time, and at different times in the same part of the lake. Mitchell (1940) found similar variations demonstrated by the deposits of an old lake basin in Eire. These variations in deposition rate in lakes in glaciated areas must presumably be due to indirect climatic effects; partly to the decrease in readily transported debris as the post-glacial climatic amelioration led to stabilization of the land surface by a plant cover, and partly to the effects of erosion and deposition by wind-produced currents in the water. The effect of these variations is to complicate the interpretation of the pollen diagrams and make it necessary to consider profiles from many parts of the lake before drawing any conclusions about either the relative length of the successive phases of forest history and the climatic periods which they indicate, or the relation of the stratigraphy of the deposits to the time-scale provided by forest history.
Derived pollen from the boulder clay has been shown to be present in lacustrine clay beds in Denmark (Iversen 1936) , but in view of the fact that no more than an occasional grain of pollen has been found in the Windermere lower laminated clay, which presumably contains redeposited boulder clay, it is probable that there is very little derived pollen in the succeeding deposits.
General stratigraphy (notes additional to 1943 paper) ( 
The appearance of the laminated clays forming the lower part of the deposits suggests strongly that the laminations represent varves, or annual laminations formed by the seasonal deposition from glacial drainage into standing water. They could therefore be compared with the Swedish varved clays, deposited by the Scandinavian ice-sheet in a fresh-water portion of the Baltic, which form the basis of De Geer's geochronology (De Geer 1908 et seq.) . In his later work (De Geer 1921 , 1927 , 1929 and 1930 De Geer claimed to have extended the varve correlations not only throughout Sweden but both transAtlantically and trans-equatorially. Time and further work will show whether these 'teleconnexions' will stand critical examination, but the correlations and consequent time-scale for Sweden are now generally accepted, and it would appear possible that the correlation might be extended into the British Isles.
Certainly the laminations in the Windermere clays conform closely to De Geer's description of the essential characteristics of a varve (see figure 15 <2, plate 2). Each layer of coarse, more or less sandy material (the deposit of the spring-summer melt), passes gradually upwards into the fine layer of often greasy clay (the finest fraction of the sediment which settled slowly out of suspension, almost certainly under ice, during the winter). The fine layer is then succeeded abruptly by the coarse layer of the following spring melt. Each varve, or annual deposit, therefore consists of the layer which lies between two of these abrupt boundaries, and the thickness of the varve is fairly easy to determine, though the boundary between the coarse and fine deposits of a single year is often indeterminate. This interpretation of the alternations in texture in the clays is borne out by the observations of Kindle (1930) on sedimentation in a glacial lake-Lake Cavell in the Canadian Rockies, which receives a stream from a glacier ending J mile above the lake. Difficulties may arise in the measurement of varves owing to the presence of deceptive bands resembling the winter layers. Such layers, which De Geer calls digraphs and tri graphs, can often be distinguished by the absence of the typical sharp winter-spring junction, but in varves as narrow as those of Windermere this may be difficult to see. These very narrow varves, here averaging about 1 mm., are what De Geer (1940) 'microdistal' varves, which he supposes to have been deposited, in Sweden, at a great distance from the ice border. This would explain the narrowness of the Windermere varves, since all the samples obtained are from positions a mile or more below the delta of the main inflow, and Kindle showed that the greater part of the suspended sediment from the inflow of Lake Cavell was deposited in the delta region. In Sweden, sections have been found showing the transition from wide varves, measured in centimetres, upwards to such microdistal varves, as the ice border retreated north and hence farther and farther from the section. The Windermere varved clay shows a similar upward passage from the lowest varves, immediately overlying a stony clay equivalent to the boulder clay, and averaging 0-5 to 1*0 cm. in width, upwards to the topmost varves which may be only 0-2 mm. in width. This upward decrease in width of the Windermere varves may well correspond to shrinkage in the size of the glacier supplying the sediment and hence to a decrease in volume of sediment supplied.
Laminated clays have, of course, been found in other parts of northern England (Trotter & Hollingworth 1932) and in Scotland (De Geer 1935) in terrestrial positions. Carruthers (1939) suggests that some at least of the terrestrial laminated clays of north-east England and the Eden valley may be explained as 'the banded dirts of the englacial detritus released by the rising bottom m elt', rather than as representing periods of ice recession and deposition in standing water. The Windermere laminated clays, however, strongly resemble the true water-lain microdistal varves described by De Geer, and bear no resemblance to any of the laminated clays described or figured by Carruthers. Faults occur occasionally in the Windermere clays, as in the Swedish varves (De Geer 1940) , but never the gross contortions and overfolds shown by some of Carruthers's specimens which he interprets as Alpine structures imposed when the 'banded dirts' were frozen muds. The graded bedding which De Geer describes as typical of varved clays was also recog nized in the discussion following Carruthers's paper (1939) as characteristic of waterlain laminated clays, and is shown by all the laminated clays in Windermere.
The general bedding of the Windermere varves is strikingly regular and horizontal, apart from microscopic irregularities in the winter-spring contact planes which give the varves a wavy outline under the microscope (figure 15 plate 2). In places where the lake floor shelves steeply (figure 2, position 4), the laminations often slope at a considerable angle, but the regular bedding is not disturbed by this. Undisturbed varved clays extend into very shallow water-i.e. to within a few yards of the edge of the lake in sheltered positions in the bays; this suggests that the lake level may have been higher when the varves were deposited, since very slight shore erosion would prevent the deposition of such fine material.
In deep water, i.e. within the 35 m. contour, the laminated clays often show marked sloping of the bedding planes, probably formed as the clay deposits filled up hollows in the original lake floor. In some positions, the very marked differences between the laminated clays in core samples taken within a few feet of each other (i.e. without moving the pontoon's anchors) suggest that deposition of the varves in deep water was by no means uniform, and that by some means marked discontinuities arose. In shallow water on both sides of the lake, however, the varve series appears very uniform in all sections taken, and conspicuous varves can be correlated easily with the naked eye.
Measurement of the varves. Hitherto, only preliminary attempts to measure the varves have been made, and there are still considerable difficulties to be overcome, owing partly to the difficulty of distinguishing digraphs and trigraphs in such very narrow varves, and partly to the wavy outlines of the boundaries which make it difficult to measure the width of metres water surface each varve with accuracy. The narrowness of the varves makes it necessary to use a microscope with a graduated mechanical stage. Though in shallow water the widest and most conspicuous varves can be recognized with ease and correlated from one core to another, some difficulty has been experienced with the intervening narrow varves, and the relation of the varve series in shallow water to that in the deep central region has not yet been worked out. Before any attem pt at correlation with the Swedish diagrams is made, it will be necessary to work out many diagrams from different cores so that a representative series for the lake as a whole, exclusive of local variations, is obtained (De Geer 1940) . It is hoped that this may form the next stage in investigation of the Windermere deposits. Only when the improved model of the core-sampler can be made will it be possible to obtain the full sequence of the laminated clays in deep water, since the length of core obtainable at present (6-5 m.) penetrates only the topmost part of the clay in deep water, where the maximum thickness of deposit is found (figure 2).
(2) Detritus silt layer within the laminated clay
In shallow water, the lower laminated clay consists of relatively wide varves at the base; these pass upwards into narrow varves which may be only 0-2 mm. thick. These narrow, microdistal varves grade upwards into a deposit of unlaminated pinkish grey clay, which in turn passes gradually into a layer of grey detritus silt. This reaches its maximum thickness of about 50 cm. in water of 3 to 10 m. depth, and becomes thinner as the water depth increases, until it disappears at about the 25 m. contour. Within this contour, the layer of grey detritus silt is not represented, but at the same horizon in the laminated clay there may occur either a very narrow layer of unlaminated clay or an interruption in the regular sequence of varves. The grey detritus silt is everywhere capped by a layer of grey clay 2 to 5 cm. thick, which may contain plant remains. This grey clay grades upwards, within the next 1 to 2 cm. thickness, into the upper laminated clay, which consists through out of very narrow microdistal varves.
The clays consist mainly of very minute particles, which remain suspended almost indefinitely in water, plus' a varying proportion of fine gravel particles, 0-5 mm. or more in diameter. In the grey layer of detritus silt the mineral particles are mainly of the fine sand or silt grade-i.e. coarser than the clays, with fine gravel particles in addition. The detailed stratigraphy of the grey layer varies from place to place (figure 11), and it may contain layers which are almost entirely clay.
The detritus consists almost entirely of plant remains in a more or less finely divided state; these occur mainly towards the top of this layer and are sometimes found in bands of almost pure plant detritus.
This layer of grey detritus silt, which apparently represents a temporary change of climate and deposition, has been found, in the water depths stated above, on both sides of the lake in the latitude of Low Wray Bay, and all along the western shore from the mouth of Blelham Beck to High Wray Bay. It therefore seems fair to conclude that it is widely developed in the North Basin in shallow water. From purely stratigraphical evidence it could be supposed that this layer was formed during a warm period in which glacial drainage was no longer entering the lake, and that this warm period was followed by a return of a colder climate which again produced glaciers in the upper valleys, the drainage from which led to the deposition of the upper laminated clay. It will be shown later that the pollen and plant remains found within the layer of detritus silt confirm this hypothesis, and support the correlation with the Allerod deposits of north-west Europe which was tentatively put forward in a former paper (Pennington 1943) .
The period generally recognized as the late-glacial corresponds (Godwin 1940a ) with that of the upper and lower Dryas clays separated by the cold temperate Allerod deposits described by continental workers (e.g. Jessen 1935; Gross 1937; Nilsson 1935; and Schutrum pf 1936) ; these three layers form Zones I to III in the zonation scheme adopted by Jessen for Denmark (Jessen 1935) and Ireland (Jessen & Farrington 1938) . Godwin (1940 suggests that if and when corresponding late-glacial deposits are found in this country, a similar zonation should be adopted.
The stratigraphy of the Windermere deposits suggested what has since been borne out by the pollen diagrams-i.e. that here the lower laminated clay, grey detritus silt and upper laminated clay probably represent respectively Zones I, II and III, which in Denmark are represented by the lower Dryas clay, the Allerod deposits and the upper Dryas clay. This succession of deposits indicates that in both localities the climatic succession was: first, a cold period (shown by the Arctic Dryas flora of the lower Dryas clay in Denmark and by the evidence for glacial drainage shown by the lower laminated clay in Windermere) followed by a cold temperate period, that is, a climatic amelioration (shown by the plant species identified from the Allerod deposits and from the grey detritus silt layer in Windermere) followed by a return of cold conditions (producing the upper Dryas clay in Denmark and the upper laminated clay in Windermere). Jessen & Farrington (1938) tentatively correlate with the succession in Denmark that which occurs in several filled-up lake basins in Ireland, where the cold periods of Zones I and III are represented by clays or solifluction earths, Arctic plants having been recovered from the upper (Zone III), while between them is a lake mud containing remains of temperate plants. Since in all three countries the second cold period is followed by post-glacial deposits, this cold period may be interpreted as corresponding to the last major halt, or possibly slight advance, of the retreating ice-sheet. The question of how far this last cold period may be regarded as contemporaneous in the three countries will be discussed later.
Zone I -lower laminated clay. Pollen is here practically absent, which agrees with what Jessen & Farrington found in this zone in the Irish profiles from Ballybetagh and Ralaghan, and Mitchell (1940) in the lacustrine deposits at Dunshaughlin, Co. Meath. (Mitchell found that in the blue-grey sandy clay which represents this zone at Dunshaughlin, the only vegetation remains were a few moss stems. Similar moss stems occur in the Windermere deposits in the silty clay forming the transition from this zone to the next.)
Zone II-grey detritus silt. The lowest deposit which contains any appreciable quantity of pollen is the silty clay forming the transition from Zone I to Zone II. Here the non-tree pollen, mainly grass, is high relative to the tree pollen, and Salix pollen is relatively abundant; the tree pollen is practically entirely Betula, with a very little Pirns. As the more or less clayey transitional deposits pass upwards into detritus silt, the ratio of both non-tree pollen and of Salix pollen to tree pollen falls sharply, indicating replacement of open vegetation by Betula woodlands as the climate became warmer. Towards the top of the detritus silt the relative amounts of grass and of Salix to tree pollen again rise, presumably corresponding with the fall in temperature at the end of the warm period. The resultant concave shape of the curves for non-tree pollen ( ), grass and Salix pollen (figures 3, 4 and 10) is characteristic of all pollen diagrams from the Allerod deposits (Jessen 1939; Nilsson 1935; Gross 1937) . Pollen of Myriophyllum alterniflorum occurs as scattered grains throughout this layer, though never in any great quantity.
Zone III-upper laminated clay. Pollen is very sparse in this deposit, and not even by boiling twice in hydrofluoric acid was it possible to obtain a sufficient concentration to yield counts which are statistically significant. This again agrees with conditions in the Irish profiles. The transition between Zones II and III is marked by a sharp rise in Pirns pollen, and Pirns also forms a high percentage of the tree pollen at the end of this zonei.e. the III to IV transition (figures 3 and 4). The evidence available for the laminated clay suggests that what little tree pollen is present is mainly throughout; this may indicate that in the absence of local pollen, Pirns transported from a distance was more important than in the preceding and following periods, when local pollen was abundant. The apparent absence of local pollen during this period strengthens the hypothesis that it was one of intense cold with only sparse vegetation.
The top of the laminated clay is taken as marking the end of any intense glacial activity in the Lake District, and the succeeding deposits are therefore classed as post-glacial. In the marginal profiles these deposits consist of brown detritus mud (gyttja) which in places (mainly in sheltered positions where the water is 2 to 5 m. deep) contains a very high proportion of plant fragments so that the deposit resembles a fine peat. The deposit in deeper water or more exposed positions contains a much higher proportion of mineral material, fewer plant remains, and much less pollen. A layer of whitish clay containing abundant diatom skeletons but very little carbonaceous material occurs in a definite relation to the mouth of each small inflow stream, in the bays where sampling has taken place.
The zonation scheme adopted by Godwin for East Anglia (1940 and the rest of England and Wales (1940^, 1945) , does not correspond with Jessen's zonation of Danish (1935) and Irish (1938) diagrams, but it is hoped that with further publication a common scheme will be evolved. It is proposed, at present, therefore, as far as possible, to apply to the Windermere deposits the zonation system originally worked out by Godwin (1940 for the East Anglian fenland, and then applied by him to the profiles from other parts of England and Wales (1940 b ) .In the later post-glacial zones this system cannot be applied very closely to the Windermere diagrams, and it may be that these will show more affinity with Jessen's Irish diagrams than with those from the east and south of England.
Zone IV -Betula-Pinus zone. This zone is conspicuous in the marginal profiles, where about 30 cm. of deposit fall within it (figures 3, 4 and 10). Pirns shows a sharp fall from the high percentage present at the III to IV transition, presumably as with increasing warmth the production of local tree pollen, mainly B e t u l a, diminished the transported from a distance (cf. Jessen, as quoted by Mitchell, 1940) . Betula is by far the most important tree in this zone, providing about 90% of the total tree pollen. Corylus and Quercus are present, sometimes discontinuously, in very small quantities; the other warmth-loving trees are absent. The end of the zone is marked, as in East Anglia (Godwin 1940 a) , by a sharp fall in the non-tree/tree pollen ratio, suggesting that with increasing temperature the forest cover was becoming denser. There is a conspicuous Salix maximum in this zone in the Windermere deposits, which agrees with Jessen's Irish diagrams from Ballybetagh and Ralaghan, but differs from profiles from Shropshire (Hardy 1939) and East Anglia (Godwin 1940#) , where the Salix maximum does not occur until Zone V.
Zone V-Pinus zone. This zone is not so well marked as in East Anglia (Godwin 1940 a) , but in each profile from shallow water there is a maximum of Pirns with a corresponding decrease in B e t u l a, about 50 cm. above the top of the laminated clay, at the beginning of the sharp rise in Corylus (figures 3 and 4). Above this horizon, however, Betula again becomes more abundant than Pirns, so that the graphs for these two trees are not strictly comparable in the diagrams from Windermere and from the east of England respectively, but this persistence of Betula as the dominant tree throughout Zone V and the earlier part of Zone VI is characteristic of most profiles from the west of England and Wales (Godwin 1940 b, figures 5, 6) . Quercus is present in small amounts, Aims and Ulmus either absent or very scanty, and Tilia completely absent. Salix decreases in this zone until it is practically absent. Corylus begins to expand very rapidly, as in most British profiles, and reaches the very high values characteristic of northern and western sites.
Zone V I --Pinus-Corylus zone. In the early part of this zone, Betula is still the dominant tree, and the Corylus curve shows a single very pronounced maximum which may reach 8 0 % of the total tree pollen. Ulmus and Quercus appear to have spread very little, corresponding with other northern sites, but one profile (figure 10) shows a small maximum of Ulmus. Tilia is absent, Aims and Salix practically so. This early part corresponds to the subzone distinguished by Godwin as V ia.
In other parts of England, the second subzone, VI is distinguished by an increase in Quercus, but this is not apparent in Windermere, where this subzone is obscure. Throughout the latter two-thirds of Zone VI, Betula and Corylus decrease steadily. In the latter part of this zone, Pinus shows a second maximum as in some other British sites; this is rapidly followed by a very sudden expansion of Quercus and particularly Aims, with a corresponding abrupt decrease in Betula and Pinus. This rapid advance of Quercus and Aims falls into what is distinguished as subzone VI in the rest of England and Wales. In Windermere, round the margin of the lake, it corresponds exactly with a stratigraphic change from brown gyttja to a whitish clay. The secondary expansion of Pinus at the beginning of VI c is in many parts of western Europe correlated with a dry period giving a growth of Pinus on the dry bog surfaces; in Windermere this maximum may indicate growth of Pinus on drying bog surfaces in the drainage basin. The very sudden expansion of Aims, replacing Pinus, almost certainly indicates increasing wetness (the Boreal-Atlantic contact), and the stratigraphic change to what is apparently an alluvial clay deposited off each stream mouth is additional evidence for increased wetness of climate. The clay is rich in lake diatoms, and so is obviously waterlain.
Zone VII-alder-mixed oak forest zone. The subsequent phases in the forest history of the Windermere region are not well represented in the marginal profiles, since the three cores examined all show truncation of the upper deposits to a greater or lesser extent (possible
reasons for this truncation will be discussed later). The longest marginal profile (figure 4) shows that above the V Ic/V H boundary, Aim continues 60 % of the total tree pollen are reached, Quercus meanwhile falling off. Tilia appears and expands early in Zone V II in this profile (contrast diagrams from the south and east where Tilia appears earlier, i.e. in V I ); U l m u sr emains fairly constant at 10 to 15% of Pinus at the extreme top of this profile agrees with what is found in the most recent deposits in deep water, and in this marginal site it probably indicates discontinuity in deposition during the phases after the early part of Zone V II.
(2) Profiles from the middle of the lake (i a) Late-glacial In most of the cores obtained from deep water the late-glacial deposits are entirely inorganic, consisting of laminated clays with sometimes thin layers of sand or unlaminated clay. The grey detritus silt of shallow water which, it has been suggested, represents Zone II, or the Allerod layer, is not found within the 15 m. contour, but in some places in deeper water there is, at what is apparently a similar horizon, in the laminated clay, a narrow band of grey silty clay or an interruption in the regular bedding of the varves. This presumably indicates an interruption in the deposition of the varves at the time when the detritus silt was forming in shallow water, i.e. Zone II, followed by the regularly bedded varves of Zone III.
Zone IV -Betula-Pinus zone. The most striking feature of the pollen diagrams from deep water as compared with those from shallow water is the immense preponderance of Pinus in the early post-glacial zones in deep water. In the middle of the lake, the Betula phase of Zone IV is either absent (figure 8) or represented only by a small maximum of Betula in the 10 to 15 cm. of deposit immediately above the top of the laminated clay (figure 9).
Zone V-Pinus zone. The phase of tremendous dominance of Pinus extends from the top of this narrow Zone IV (or, where this is absent, from the top of the laminated clay) to the horizon about 1 m. above this, where Pinus is replaced by the rapidly expanding , i.e. Zone VI c .Within this metre of deposit, tree pollen other than Pinus is exceedingly sparse, and the only means of determining the boundaries of Zones V/VI is provided by the curve for Corylus. If Corylus is expressed as percentage of the total tree pollen, its curve has no definite form, but if the amount of Corylus is expressed as a percentage of the tree pollen excluding P i n u s , a very sharply defined peak corresponding to that shown by Corylu in marginal profiles is obtained. This peak, the sharp rise of which determines the boundary between Zones V and V ia occurs about 25 cm. above the top of the laminated clay. Zones IV and V are therefore represented by a much greater thickness of deposit in shallow water than in the middle of the lake.
Zone VI-Pinus-Corylus zone. The complete dominance of Pinus over all the other trees is maintained, with Corylus (expressed as percentage of tree pollen minus Pinus) falling steadily from its single maximum, until the horizon is reached at which Pinus falls off very abruptly and is replaced by the broad-leaved trees (VI , Quercus and Ulmus all expand simultaneously, and Betula also shows a percentage increase, but this is almost certainly not an absolute increase, but only relative, due to the decrease in Pinus. This sudden expansion of the broad-leaved trees corresponds, just as it does in shallow water, with a distinct stratigraphical horizon-here the topmost of the narrow clay bands. The implications of this will be discussed after the series showing the transition from marginal to central profiles has been considered.
Zone VII-Alder-mixed oak forest zone. The early part of this zone resembles the same horizon in the marginal profiles, with 7 Ilia coming in just above the Instead of the truncation which is present in all marginal profiles, however, 3 to 4 m. of brown gyttja are present above the V Ir/V II transition in deep-water profiles, and no consistent change in the proportions of the tree pollens takes place until the topmost 50 cm. of deposit are reached. Pirns falls off very rapidly just above the VI r/V II transition, and practically disappears for several metres of deposit. There is no trace of any increase in Betula, and this, combined with the complete absence of Fagus and Carpinus, makes it impossible to apply any further the zonation worked out for East Anglia and the rest of England and Wales. Possibly the Windermere diagrams may have more affinities with Jessen's hitherto unpublished profiles from Eire.
P irns, after its virtual disappearance some 2 m. below the mud surface, reappears at about 50 cm. below the mud surface and increases rapidly, until in the surface deposits it may reach 50 % of the total tree pollen. This suggests that the native P. sylvestris may have died out at some point in Zone V II, and that the reappearance of Pirns pollen in the most recent deposits may be due to planting.
The curve for grass pollen shows a steady rise from shortly after the beginning of Zone V II onwards, but the rise is greatly accelerated some 50 cm. below the point where Pirns reappears (figures 8, 9). The implications of this will be considered later.
(3)
The eight cores on which pollen analyzes have been made form approximately a transverse section across the North Basin. A more detailed individual consideration of these cores will trace the transition from the marginal to the central stratigraphical and pollen sequence.
(a) Cores 1 and 2, marginal, figures 3 and 4. These are from water of 3 and 3-5 m. depth respectively. Core 1 represents conditions off the stony shore in the middle of the curve of Low Wray Bay, and core 2 is from a position 150 yards to the north of this, in a sheltered site off the mouth of a small inflow stream near the northern horn of the bay (figure 1). The late-glacial zones correspond almost exactly in these two cores; the post-glacial sequence is more complete in the second. Though the two cores are not on the same transect across the lake, they illustrate two types of marginal sequence which may occur in closely adjacent positions.
Zones I, II and III are represented by the stratigraphical succession described in the preceding section as typical of the late-glacial deposits in the lake. Zone II, the detritus silt, is thicker (61 cm. as against 54 cm.) and contains more organic remains in core 1, from nearer the shore, probably due to the drift of sediment controlled by the water currents prevailing at the time. The pollen curves for the late-glacial correspond exactly in the two diagrams (figures 3 and 4), with Betula making up more than 90% of the pollen in the detritus silt, Pirns occasional, and Quercus appearing at the top. The curves for and grass pollen have the concave shape characteristic of deposits of the Allerod oscillation. The upper laminated clay (Zone III) corresponds exactly in these two cores, there being about six conspicuous grey varves which can be readily correlated with the naked eye. Zone IV is also closely similar in the two cores. Stratigraphically it is a clay-gyttja in which the clay content decreases rapidly on passing upwards from the top of the upper laminated clay. The point at which this pinkish clay-gyttja passes upwards into brown detritus gyttja is indeterminate, but corresponds approximately with what appears to be the IV/V transition, i.e. the point where a maximum of Pinus begins to develop and about the point where the falling grass crosses the rising Corylus curve. Zone IV therefore almost corresponds with this clay-gyttja in these two cores, the latter being about 25 cm. thick and Zone IV 25 to 35 cm., according to where the boundary is fixed. Zones V and VI a are again exactly similar in the two cores, with Betula recovering its dominance after the small Pirns maximum of Zone V, and Corylus rising ex to very high values. The deposit is a brown detritus gyttja containing very abundant plant remains in a finely divided state. So abundant are these vegetable fragments that the gyttja has an appearance approaching that of a very fine peat.
The topmost deposits of core 1 (apart from possibly 1 or 2 cm. of unconsolidated surface ooze which tends to wash out of the sampler) belong to Zone VI a-i.e. are of Boreal age. This truncation of the profile suggests that the deposits continued to accumulate until the surface was built up into the zone of wave erosion, after which no further deposition was possible. The present depth of water at this site at mean lake level is 3 m.
The post-glacial deposits of core 2 (water depth 3-5 m.) extend for a further 2-5 m. above the horizon at which core 1 is truncated; presumably this represents deposition in a hollow in the late-glacial lake floor. Zone V I shows the features described in the preceding section, and covers a total thickness of about 2 m. The marked stratigraphical change from gyttja to whitish clay which accompanies the rapid expansion of and (less strikingly) Quercus, in VI c ,has already received comment. Along the western shores of the North Basin this clay is thickest off the mouths of small inflow streams (core 2 being from such a position), from which it thins out both laterally and towards the middle of the lake, but further analysis will be necessary in order to determine its depth-time relationships at the margin of each deposit. In Zone V II Pinus falls off rapidly to very low values, and Tilia shows an expansion (characteristic of early Zone V II in all the Windermere diagrams) followed by a rapid falling off. Alnus maintains its predominance until the topmost 10 cm. is reached; here Pinus shows a rapid expansion corresponding with the stratigraphical change from the topmost part of the clay, here brown and indurated, to soft black, more or less uncon solidated gyttja. Comparison with the profiles from the middle of the lake suggests that the black gyttja containing Pinus is recent, so it appears that this core was truncated about 90 cm. above the base of ZoneV I I ; thePm&y-containing gyttja maybe unconsolidated deposit still undergoing wave erosion, or it may be that changes in the prevailing wind and hence in currents have made accumulation possible again in this position after a discontinuity. 
Core 3, in 10 m. of water, and in addition the basal part of core 3 from 7-6 m. of water was analyzed. In these cores the upper and lower laminated clays resemble the corresponding deposits in the marginal profiles, but the intervening detritus silt is much thinner there than in cores 1 and 2, and is very different in character. Whereas in those cores Zone II is a detritus silt which in places becomes almost pure plant detritus, in cores 3 and 3 a the corresponding deposit contains much less organic matter, practically no plant remains, and very little pollen, and it is practically a pure silt with a little clay admixture.
So sparse is the pollen in this silt that it was not possible to construct any pollen cufves for the late-glacial in these cores. The few counts available show that is more abundant than Betula in the silt layer. From its position between the upper and lower laminated clays this layer must be correlated with Zone II in the marginal profiles, and there Betula is dominant throughout this zone. The relative increase in on passing into deeper water may be due to the same causes as the corresponding phenomenon in the post-glacial deposit, which is discussed at the end of this section.
In these two cores, Zones IV, V and VI are very narrow compared with the marginal sites (figures 5 and 6), and it is difficult to define their boundaries accurately. After an initial phase of high Pirns at the transition from the upper laminated clay to the post-glacial deposits, there is in both cores a narrow layer where Betula is present in appreciable quantity, this Betula phase being better developed in 3 (7-6 m.) than in 3 (10 m.). , however, remains the dominant species throughout these early zones in both cores. In 3 a,Corylus shows a well-marked single maximum with its peak (Zone V ia) just above the Betula maximum, and the Corylus curve retains this form when Corylus is expressed as percentage of total tree pollen minus Pinus. In core 3, Corylus shows no maximum when plotted as percentage of total tree pollen, but if plotted as percentage of total tree pollen minus P i n u s, a conspicuous maximum appears at a corresponding horizon to that in core 3a, i.e. just above the Betula maximum. In both cores the Corylus maximum (Zone V ia) is followed almost immediately by the very rapid expansion of Alnus and Quercus with corresponding decrease in P i n u s, characteristic of Zone VI and the subsequent form the pollen curves is similar to that already described for Zone V II. At 1 m. below the mud surface, Tilia and Ulmus practically disappear-this may represent Zone V II and correspond with the similar disappearance of these two species at the top of the diatomaceous white clay in core 2. The deposits of cores 3 and 3 are stratigraphically uniform (brown gyttja) from Zone VI cu ntil the 20 cm. of surface ooze is reac shows the marked increase which has already been mentioned as occurring in the recent deposits.
These two cores therefore show two striking differences from the marginal cores. First, there is the compression of Zones IV, V and VI into about 25 cm. of deposit as compared with 250 cm. in core 2, and the fact that all three pollen zones are here included in the stratigraphical zone of clay-gyttja, whereas in cores 1 and 2 Zone IV covered the entire thickness of this deposit. Secondly, there is the overwhelming dominance of Pirns in these early zones, contrasted with the same zones in the marginal profiles, where Pirns occurs in roughly the same (or somewhat smaller) proportions to the other trees as at corresponding levels in pollen diagrams from the rest of England (Godwin 1940 £) . In immediately post glacial times, therefore, deposition must have been much more rapid at the margins (3 m.) than in water 7 to 10 m. deep, and the deposit in the more central position was claygyttja throughout the period until the Boreal-Atlantic transition, whereas at the margin this facies developed only in Zone IV, being followed by detritus gyttja in Zones V and VI.
(c) Core 4, from 27 m. of water. The present floor of the lake slopes steeply at this point (figure 2), and the junction between the top of the laminated clay and the post-glacial gyttja shows that the late-glacial lake floor also sloped steeply. It was immediately evident from the stratigraphy of this core that a discontinuity was present at the top of the laminated clay, which was overlain by brown detritus gyttja without any trace of the transitional claygyttja present in both deeper and shallower water. The whole of the laminated clay in this core resembles the lower laminated clay rather than the upper, because the laminations are all relatively wide. The total thickness of the detritus gyttja (brown mud) is here much less than in cores from either deeper or shallower water. All these factors agree in suggesting that a strong unconformity is present, and pollen analysis confirmed this (figure 7). The relatively wide laminations of the clay place it in Zone I, which means that the whole of Zones II and III are missing. The base of the gyttja (brown mud), i.e. at the contact of this deposit with the laminated clay, has a pollen spectrum characteristic of Zone V II, with Aims reaching nearly 4 0 %, high , Tilia present, and Betula and Pirns present in only small quantities. The pollen curves above this point take the form characteristic of Zone V II in Windermere, and there is the usual increase in Pinus corresponding with the development of the surface ooze. It is obvious that in this core there are missing not only Zones II and III, but also IV, V, VI and the early part of V II (before the appearance of Tilia). Clearly either the conditions during the period of formation of Zones Il/V IIa were such that no deposition took place, or else violent erosion removed these deposits before the deposition of the existing gyttja-i.e. approxi mately Zone V II c.The former explanation seems more probable, since it is easier imagine climatic plus topographical conditions which would produce an off-shore current preventing deposition, than to suggest any possible cause of sufficiently powerful erosion in this depth of water.
Cores 6, in 46 m. of water, and 7, in 65 m. of water. Both these cores are from the middle of the lake, and their position on the profile of this transect is shown in figure Core 7 is from the deepest central part of the lake, i.e. about 600 yards to the south of the line of the transect. The two cores correspond almost exactly with each other, except that in core 7 each post-glacial zone and stratigraphical horizon is expanded as compared with core 6, the total thickness of deposit above the laminated clay being 5*3 m. in core 7 compared with 4*2 m. in core 6. The pollen diagrams from these cores have already been described. Zones IV, V and VI are difficult to distinguish, since the enormous preponderance of Pirns pollen (average 9 0 %) masks the other changes. Pollen other than Pirns is very sparse. The very high peak of the Corylus maximum which appears when Corylus is plotted as percentage of the tree pollen minus
Pinus fixes the horizon of Zone V ia, but otherwise no boundaries can be assigned to these first three post-glacial zones. The thickness of deposit included in these zones is 50 cm. in core 6 and 140 cm. in core 7, and in each core this corresponds exactly with the stratigraphical zone of clay-gyttja, or zone of narrow clay bands (the latter referring to the narrow bands of pink unlaminated clay which are present in the claygyttja in deep water (Pennington 1943) ). In each core, the topmost of these narrow clay bands corresponds exactly with the rapid expansion of the broad-leaved trees (particularly Alnus) with corresponding decrease in P i n u s, i.e. the Zone V Ir/V II boundar curves for Zone V II have already been described, as also has the increase in Pinus corresponding with the surface ooze.
(e) Core 8, marginal, from 4*8 m. on the eastern side of the lake. This core corresponds almost exactly with the marginal cores from the western shore, being intermediate between cores 1 and 2 in most respects. The late glacial zones and Zone IV correspond exactly in all three cores; core 8 is truncated very early in Zone V II, and the thickness of deposit in Zones IV to VI is rather less than in core 2 (figure 10). (4) Conclusions drawn from zonation of pollen diagrams The width of the zones in shallow water and deep water respectively shows that in lateglacial and early post-glacial times, organic deposits accumulated much more rapidly at the margins than in deep water, where deposition was very slow. Deposition at the margins apparently ceased when the mud surface came within about 3 m. of the water surface. The shore-line of Low Wray Bay on the position of the transect is stony and the site of core 1 (3 m. water depth) was the shallowest place where the bottom was consistently soft. It is known from recent sedimentation experiments (Pennington, in preparation) that turbulence in the lake water may pick up sediment which has already been deposited on the bottom, even in water depths considerably greater than 3 m. These results of observations in Low Wray Bay suggest that where the shore-line is stony to a depth of about 3 m., no further accumulation of sediment is taking place, and therefore in such a position under present circumstances-the lake floor will never rise above the water-line; therefore there is no hydrosere (Tutin 1941) . Mitchell (1940) found that in the old lake basin at Dunshaughlin, Co. Meath, the early post-glacial zones were very narrow in the central part of the basin-i.e. that here also deposition was rapid at the margins compared with the centre in the early post-glacial stages. At Dunshaughlin, however, the marginal accumulation continued until the deposits were built up above water-level, and in time the shallow basin was almost completely filled by this process combined with more rapid accumulation qf detritus mud in the centre during and after Zone V II (Jessen's zonation-'the first period in which Aims reaches a dominant position'). Comparing figure 2 b with Mitchell's figure 7, it will be seen that appreciable deposition in the central part of Windermere began at about the same period but was much more rapid, presumably because of the much greater volume of sediment entering the lake. The differences can all be related to the great contrast in size and shape between the two basins, the late-glacial floor of Windermere forming a basin, reaching a maximum depth of c. 70 m., and with an area whereas at Dunshaughlin the late-glacial basin was only about 6 m. deep and 1 mile long by | mile wide. This means that wave action would be very much restricted in the Dunshaughlin basin compared with Windermere, so that the marginal deposits accumu lated continuously until they reached water-level, when peat formation began. These two lake basins are an interesting example of the contrast in the method of filling up of a small shallow and a large deep lake respectively. Considering the pollen zonation in relation to the stratigraphy, while the late-glacial Zones I, II and III correspond exactly with stratigraphical horizons, the early post-glacial zones present a more complex picture. In both marginal and central positions, the earliest post-glacial deposit is a transitional clay-gyttja, thicker in the centre than at the margins and containing a characteristic diatom flora (Pennington 1943) . It was formerly assumed that this clay-gyttja (or 'zone of narrow clay bands' in deep water) was contemporaneous in deep and in shallow water, but the results of pollen analysis show that this is not so. In the marginal sites, the clay-gyttja corresponds approximately with Zone IV, but in deep water the zone of narrow clay bands includes Zones IV, V and VI, so that only the basal part, at most that below the lowest clay band, is contemporaneous with the shallowwater clay-gyttja. The upper part of the zone of narrow clay bands in deep water is there fore contemporaneous with 'brown m ud' (detritus gyttja) in shallow water. In the intermediate water depths where the lake floor shelves steeply, pollen analysis has confirmed the results ofstratigraphical observation-i.e. that there is a strong unconformity (figure
The distribution of Pirns pollen shows two striking features. Its frequency is high at t beginning and end of Zone III, and possibly also in the main part of Zone III. Jessen (1929) suggests that this apparent importance of Pinus in cold periods may be due to the undue prominence of pollen transported from a distance when local pollen is sparse. Groschopf (1936) quotes evidence (Knoll 1932 ) that long-distance transport of Pinus does not occur to any great extent, but believes that differential settling of pollen may occur in lake deposits (Ernst 1934 ) where a marked dominance of Pinus may occur.
This last is interesting in view of the second striking feature in the distribution of Pinus pollen in Windermere, which is its extremely high frequency in the middle of the lake in Zones IV, V and VI, while at the margins the frequency of in these zones is much lower. A similar example of difference in composition of the pollen spectrum of marginal and central deposits is recorded by H arri (1940) from a Swiss 'moss' which was originally a moraine-dammed lake; here Fagus is better represented in the centre and Abies at the margins. Such a difference may be explained either by a difference between the local (marginal) pollen rain and the general (regional) pollen rain which reaches the middle of the lake, or by differential settling or preservation of the pollen of various species in deep and in shallow water.
In Windermere there is no positive evidence that Pinus was so overwhelmingly dominant in the regional pollen rain as it is in the deposits from the centre of the lake. In the nearest terrestrial profiles analyzed (e.g. Hardy 1939 ) Pinus is present in Zones IV, V and VI in proportions approximately similar to those found at the same horizons in the marginal deposits of Windermere-i.e. there is much less Pinus pollen in these terrestrial deposits than in the central deposits of Windermere. Moreover, the Boreal hazel maximum, which is a feature recognized throughout north-west Europe to the west of Ireland, becomes apparent in the central deposits of Windermere only when Corylus is plotted as a percentage of tree pollen minus Pinus. This suggests that the spectrum of the marginal deposits gives the truest picture of the amount of Pinus in the drainage basin as a whole, and that Pinus is strongly over-represented in the centre.
No quantitative estimates have been made of the absolute frequency of and the deciduous pollens, but it is obvious that the marginal deposits are much richer in pollen than are those in the centre. Pollen of the deciduous trees is very sparse throughout the central deposits; the relative abundance of pollen in the lower central deposits is due entirely to the great quantities of Pinus pollen present. It therefore appears little pollen except that of Pinus becomes incorporated in the central deposits, so that whenever Pinus is present in the vegetation it becomes over-represented in these central deposits.
Further experimental work would probably help to elucidate the reasons for this. A pollen count from the surface mud in the centre of the lake gave a spectrum containing 5 0 % P i n u s; this appears to be an over-estimate of its proportion in the surrounding vege tation, but it is not possible to say this with certainty until we know more of the relative amounts of pollen produced by different trees. The sources of the pollen which becomes incorporated in the central deposits could be investigated by examining the content of (1) the inflow water, and (2) the pollen rain reaching the water surface in the middle of the lake; this would show whether Pinus is already over-represented in this. If not, it is probable that differential settling or differential preservation favours the accumulation of Pinus rather than the deciduous pollens.
The change from the marginal type of deposit to the central in which , if occurring, is over-represented, occurs in 4 to 10 m. of water in Low Wray Bay, and coincides with a stratigraphical change from very organic brown mud (gyttja) containing abundant plant detritus, to the much less organic brown mud characteristic of the centre of the lake. The absolute pollen frequency is high in the marginal gyttja and low in deposits from water of more than 8 m. deep. It seems likely that this depth of water indicates the position, on this transect, of the boundary between the deposits of predominantly littoral origin and those originating from material carried in by the inflow.
The curve for grass pollen expressed as percentage of the total tree pollen shows the characteristic concave shape in Zones I, II and III, indicating that woodland had more or less replaced open grassland at the height of the climatic amelioration in Zone II. Grass pollen is again abundant at the opening of Zone IV, and falls rapidly throughout this zone with the advance of the forest cover. In Zone VI the relative amount of grass pollen slowly begins to rise, and this rise is greatly accelerated in the topmost 1 to 1*5 m. of deposit (figures 7, 8 and 9) . This rise may indicate forest clearance (cf. Iversen 1941) while this topmost 1 to 1-5 m. was accumulating; if so, forest clearance in the district probably began 2000 to 2500 years ago. For a discussion of this point see Pearsall & Pennington (1947) .
All the late-glacial plant remains which have been recovered came from this detritus silt layer; no plant remains have been found in either the upper or the lower laminated clay in any part of the lake. The detritus silt contains plant remains only in the marginal cores-i.e. those from very shallow water. The plants listed here were all found in cores 1, 2 and 8 already described, or in cores from equally shallow water in the bays in the western shore between High Wray Bay and the mouth of Blelham Beck. In water deeper than 5 m. the deposits of this layer are mainly inorganic with very little plant detritus.
The lowest and, therefore, presumably the oldest organic remains found in the lake were almost leafless moss stems, apparently much eroded, present in the greyish pink clay forming the transitional deposit between the lower laminated clay (Zone I) and the detritus silt (Zone II). Mitchell (1940) found similar moss stems occurring as the oldest 
organic remains in a former lake basin in Ireland, at the base of Zone II. There seems no possibility of identifying the moss stems from Windermere unless specimens in a better state of preservation are found, but it was apparently a long-stemmed, probably creeping type. The grey-pink clay passes upwards into a transitional clay-silt, containing stems and leaves of mosses belonging to the genera Hypnum and , and leaves identified as those of Poly trichum alpinum. One fragment of a larger leaf (figure 12) resembles Salix phylicifolia, which Jessen & Farrington (1938) record from what they regard as Zone II at Ballybetagh, near Dublin, and Hartz & Milthers (1901) from Zone I at Allerod; in all instances the fossil leaf is distinguished from S. repens by its flat margin, the margin of the leaf of S. repens being recurved. The Windermere specimen is, however, too fragmentary to be identified other than tentatively. (The present distribution of S. phylicifolia in northern Britain is along streams on limestone above the 600 ft. contour (Pearsall in litt.) .) In this transitional clay-silt the pollen diagrams show that the ratio of non-tree pollen (mainly grass) to tree pollen was high; in conjunction with the above plant list this may be regarded as indicating that the vegetation was open and included at least some species having a northern distribution at the present day.
The transitional clay-silt passes upwards into the main detritus silt, which is in parts very rich in plant remains. This corresponds to the horizon where Betula pollen is very strongly dominant-i.e. Zone II, and probably represents a period when birch woodland was the prevailing vegetation, since the ratio n .t.p ./t.p . is low. Catkin scales and fruits of Betula corresponding to those of B. pubescens Ehrh. em. Koch (Lindman 1926) occur throughout this middle part of Zone II, and are commonest about two-thirds of the way up (table 1); this appears to have been the height of the birchwood phase. No remains of B. nana were found in any layer in Windermere. The pollen grains of Betula from the lateglacial layers were all measured, but the size-frequency graphs gave no consistent indication of a bi-modal curve, such as would have been expected had the smaller grains of B. nana been present (Godwin 1934) . Moss stems and leaves, some in a fairly good state of preser vation, are common, including Barbula cf.
r u b e, Rhacomitrium cf. fasci spp., Hypnum spp., etc. Other terrestrial plants identified from this phase of Zone II are Rubus saxatilis (seed), Viola palustris (seed), Thalictrum minus (fruit), Menyanthes trifoliata (seed), Andromeda polifolia (leaf fragments) and Populus tremula (catkin scale) (figures 13 and 14). Fruits and perianth segments of a Rumex were common in the upper part of this horizon; the perianth segments (see figure 12) were fairly large, cordate at the base, without tubercles, and with undulated margins to the epidermal cells, and the nut was 3 to 3'5 mm. long. This suggests that the species was R. but does not exclude R. arifolius (recorded by G. C. Druce three times from the Scottish mountains), or R. thyrsijlorus (a Scandinavian species). Jessen (1938) , recording R. Acetosa from the lake mud which he regards as the equivalent of the Allerod layer at Ballybetagh, near Dublin, comments that 'it goes far up over the forest limit in Scandinavia'. It is possible that the occurrence of R. Acetosa in considerable quantity in the deposit above the maximum Betula development indicates the beginning of cooler conditions with consequent decrease in tree growth, but since it is such a common plant in the district to-day this is by no means conclusive.
Unidentified fragments of the leaves of broad-leaved plants, twigs and bark are very common in this main part of the detritus silt. Many of the larger leaf fragments are almost certainly those of a large-leaved B e t u l a, but are too small to be identified with c The most abundant of all the plant remains in this layer are the leaf segments of Myriophyllum, which in places occur as an almost pure deposit (figure 15 plate 2). Like most of the organic remains they appear to have suffered considerable erosion; it is therefore impossible to determine their original length, and hence not possible to refer them to a species with any certainty. The segments are more slender than seems usual in M. and on the whole they are wider than the long segments of the aquatic form of M. verticillatum, so it is reasonable to suggest that they are most likely to be M. alterniflorum. This would agree with the fact that the only Myriophyllum pollen found in this layer is that of 21-2 
alternijiorum , but is, of course, in no sense proved by this. Whatever the species it seems certain that a luxuriant littoral growth of Myriophyllum was a feature of the lake vegetation during this period. In all the cores examined the detritus silt is overlain by 2 to 5 cm. of grey clay containing plant remains which forms the topmost deposit of Zone II. Plant remains, like the pollen, are sparser in this clay than in the detritus silt, but the leaves of Polytrichum alpinum are common, and the fruit and perianth segments of Oxyria digyna were found at the base of this clay in one core (figure 12). Fruits of Car ex and Scirpus spp. are also common. Oxyria digyna is recorded by Jessen (1938) from Zone III at Ballybetagh; its present distribution is markedly Arctic-Alpine. Its appearance here at the top of Zone II, accompanied by Polytrichum a l p i n u m , a mountain and moorland species, together with the fact that here the n .t.p ./t.p . ratio again becomes high, suggests that this 2 to 5 cm. of grey clay was deposited under conditions colder than the preceding, when the climate was again becoming severe. The grey clay is everywhere overlain by horizontally bedded laminated clay (Zone III), showing that there were again glaciers in the drainage basin.
Correlation of this late-glacial detritus silt with the Altered layer of north-western Europe which has been recognized in Ireland. All the evidence from Windermere, from stratigraphy, pollen analysis and macroscopic plant remains, supports the view that this detritus silt represents a temporary period of relative warmth during the retreat of the ice-sheet. T hat this period was not of interglacial magnitude is shown by the relative narrowness of its deposits (maximum 50 cm.) and by the fact that it is overlain only by a comparatively thin deposit of laminated (and therefore presumably waterlain) clay. This shows that there was no readvance of ice over the site after the temperate period, but presumably only a downward movement of valley glaciers from the central mountains towards the lake. This is in contrast with the interglacial deposits of the neighbouring coastal plain (Kendall 1881; Eastwood, Dixon, Hollingworth & Smith 1931) where peat beds containing the remains of temperate plants are sometimes several feet thick and are overlain by boulder clay, presumably deposited in situ. It would appear probable that the layer of detritus silt in Windermere was produced as the result of a temporary fluctuation during the final retreat of the icei.e. subsequently to the formation of the upper layer of boulder clay on the coast.
The deposits of a similar climatic fluctuation, involving a temporary warmer period, have been described by many continental workers, and correlated with Jessen's zonation in Denmark, where the deposits of Zone II (the temperate or cool-temperate period) are known as the Allerod layer, from the locality where they were first described (Hartz & Milthers 1901) . Deposits referable to the 'Allerod period', i.e. Jessen's Zone II, have been discovered in west Norway (Nordmann 1912; Faegri 1936) , south Sweden (Nilsson 1935) , north Germany, east Prussia and the Baltic States (Gross 1937 (Gross ,1938 , as well as in Denmark. Mention has already been made of the late-glacial lake mud found in Ireland which has been tentatively correlated by Jessen with the Danish Allerod (Jessen & Farrington 1938; Mitchell 1940) . These deposits all agree in possessing certain characters which are also possessed by the Windermere deposits described in this paper as Zone II. Typically the temperate or cool-temperate ' Allerod layer ' consists of a fresh-water deposit resting on the clay of Zone I, which is either boulder clay, or clay containing Arctic plants, or laminated clay resting on glacial sands or boulder clay, as in Windermere. The overlying deposit of Zone III is not a boulder clay deposited in , but usually a clay which may contain Arctic plants, or else, as in Ireland, an unsorted mineral deposit apparently originating by solifluction. In each locality the deposit of Zone III is the uppermost (and hence the latest) deposit showing any trace of Arctic influence, and each of the above authors places the late-glacial/post-glacial boundary at the upper limit of Zone III. This agrees completely with the succession in Windermere.
The plants identified, either by pollen or macroscopic plant remains, show that the vegetation of the Windermere region at this period had many features in common with that of the continental localities described by the above authors. At the height of the climatic amelioration, the prevailing vegetation was woodland, predominantly the large Betula species (i.e. other than B. nana), with some Pirns and Populus tremula (Jessen 1939; Gross 1937) . If plants have been identified from the underlying and oveflying deposits (usually clays) some Arctic-Alpine species are usually included (Jessen 1935, etc.; Hartz & Milthers 1901) ; in Denmark Zones I and III are known as the lower and upper Dry as clays, and D. octopetala commonly occurs at these horizons in other localities. No trace of this species has been found in Windermere, but three species, Polytrichum alpinum, Oxyria digyna and Salix p h y l i c i f o l i a , having a northern distribution have been found at the base and top of Zone II. Myriophyllum a l t e r n i f l o r u m , common in Zone II in Windermere, is a species characteristic of late-glacial and pre-Boreal deposits (Nilsson 1935; Erdtm an 1943; Von Post 1935) . The flora of the Allerod layer, cool-temperate at the height of the period, contrasts with that of interglacial deposits in Denmark, in which remains of a warmthloving flora, mixed oak forest with T ilia,A cer campestre and Carpinus , in the summers in this interglacial period were warmer than at the present day (Jessen & Milthers 1928 ).
Most of the plant remains in the deep-water deposits are too finely divided to be identified, though an exception occurs in the layers of what is apparently flood debris which occur in positions off the mouths of larger inflow streams (Pennington 1943) .
In very shallow water, where the post-glacial deposits above the basal clay-gyttja consist of very organic gyttja with large quantities of visible plant remains (see previous section), the leaf segments of M y r i o p h y l l u m, probably a l, are abunda but not in later deposits. Fragments of leaves, twigs and bark, and pieces of wood up to 1 cm. cube, occur occasionally in these deposits. The wood is much decayed, and it has not yet been possible to identify it by microscopic examination.
(1) Dating the deposits; possible correlations [a) Late-glacial. Evidence has been given in the preceding section for correlating the late-glacial sequence in Windermere with that found in Ireland and north-west Europe. If this evidence is accepted, it establishes that, both in north-west England and Ireland on the one side and north-west Europe on the other, there occurred a temporary warmer period with temperate or cold-temperate birchwoods, during the last stages of retreat of the Quaternary ice-sheets. The cold period following this warmer period represented the last appreciable advance or halt of the Quaternary ice, and the deposits of this cold period contain the last records of Arctic-Alpine plants in lowland districts. The deposits of the temporary warm period, the Allerod, have been recognized all round the southern edge of the Scandinavian ice-sheet, from western Norway to western Russia (see previous section). In Ireland the deposits so far described indicate that a similar climatic oscillation occurred during the final retreat of valley glaciers from the mountains of Wicklow and north-west Ireland (Jessen & Farrington 1938; Mitchell 1940) .
In all these localities the sequence of deposits shows that the last cold period was followed by the gradually improving climate of the post-glacial period, the climatic sequence being that described by Blytt & Sernander-i.e. a gradual increase in average temperature through the dry pre-Boreal and Boreal periods, followed by the wet warm Atlantic period in which occurred the so-called climatic optimum, followed by decreasing temperature. Forest development as shown by pollen analysis followed a parallel course through open birchwood, birch-pine, pine forests, and then the incoming of mixed oak forest with alder at the opening of the Atlantic period. This parallel development of climate and vegetation strongly suggests that the last cold period on the margins of the north-west European centres of glaciation was roughly contemporaneous in all these localities (Zeuner 1946) , since to suppose otherwise would be to assume that the succeeding phases of forest development were not contemporaneous, and if this were so it is difficult to understand why they followed such a parallel course in localities from western Ireland and Norway to western Russia.
If it is found possible to correlate the series of varves in Windermere with the Swedish series, this should give valuable evidence of this question of contemporaneity of the Allerod layer in the different localities, though the interpretation of the varves which occur in Zone I (i.e. below the lake mud) at Allerod itself appears still to be controversial (De Geer 1916; Nordmann 1922; Milthers 1927) . The time-scale based on the Swedish varves, developed by De Geer (1908 et seq., 1940 appears to be the most promising source of a late-glacial chronology on which direct time correlations could be based. The difficulties incurred in measurement of the Windermere varves have been discussed, but it is probable that improvements in technique may enable these difficulties to be overcome.
Meanwhile the Windermere varves have provided one positive piece of evidence in favour of direct correlation with the continental succession. It is now generally considered by continental workers (Gross 1937; Gams 1938) , in spite of the earlier controversies, that the cold period which followed the Allerod oscillation was that during which the Fennoscandian moraines were formed-i.e. the last major halt of the retreating Scandinavian ice-sheet. De Geer (1910 £) pointed out that this period when the ice border was stationary at the Fennoscandian moraines was the last period when an Arctic marine fauna flourished in the Baltic. Also (1908) he showed, from varve counts on a transect at right angles to the general trend of these moraines, that the ice border remained stationary for between 100 and 200 years, and then retreated only very slowly during the next 300 years-i.e. that the cold period lasted 400 to 500 years. A count of the annual laminations in the upper laminated clay of Windermere (i.e. the cold period following the deposition of the detritus silt which is correlated with the Allerod layer) gave 377 as the total, and if the grey claysilt layer containing Oxyria digyna at the base of the laminated clay is included, 400 to 500 years would be a reasonable estimate for this period. (It should, however, be noted that this figure of 377 annual laminations could be altered very considerably if composite varves (cf. De Geer's digraphs and trigraphs) were regarded as several distinct narrow varves, and that until direct comparison has been made with De Geer's Swedish material the counting method must be regarded as somewhat subjective.) In addition, De Geer's estimate of the length of this period differs from that of Sauramo (1939) , who estimated the period of formation of the Salpausselkas, in Finland, as c. 700 years.
There does, however, appear to be sufficient evidence available on which to build a tentative correlation of these English late-glacial deposits with those of Ireland and the Continent. Assuming that the deposits of Zone II (the Allerod layer) are contemporaneous in Windermere and Ireland, the upper laminated clay of Windermere (Zone III) would be contemporaneous with the valley glaciation of the Wicklow mountains (Jessen & Farrington j 938) which took place while the solifluction layer of Zone III was forming at Ballybetagh. According to Charlesworth (1939) and Farrington (1945) this Wicklow valley glaciation ( = the Athdown mountain glaciation) probably belongs to the cold period of the Antrim coast readvance which followed that during which the readvance of Scottish ice on to the coast of Cumberland occurred (Charlesworth 1939) . This period of the Scottish (Solway) readvance would therefore be that during which Zone I or the lower laminated clay was formed in Windermere, and the latter is therefore dated as contemporaneous with the Upper (Red) Boulder Clay of the Cumberland coast, which is considered to be the deposit of this readvance of the Scottish ice (Eastwood 1931; Trotter & Hollingworth 1932 ). This agrees with the conclusion of these latter workers that during this period any advance of the glaciers in the centre of the Lake District was confined to the upper ends of the valleys and that there was no outward movement of the Lake District ice beyond the boundary of the mountain group (Hollingworth 1931) . T hat is, it seems probable that the drainage from these glaciers was producing laminated clays in Windermere but that the ice front did not reach the lake. On the other hand, there is no evidence of a break between the lower laminated clay and the underlying stony clay, so it is conceivable that this latter may represent the deposits of the valley glaciers at the height of the period of the Scottish readvance, followed by laminated clays as the retreat at the end of the period began; but it seems more likely that the basal stony clay is the deposit of the ice of the preceding period -i.e. the main glaciation of the north-west (Eastwood 1931 )-which presumably deposited the morainic dam at the foot of the lake. The laminated clay of Zone III on this correlation would represent a cold period later than that of the Scottish readvance, with valley glaciers in the Lake District corresponding to the valley glaciation of the Wicklow mountains and possibly to the valley glaciation of the Scottish Highlands (Movius 1942 ), but possibly not (Farrington 1945) . Table 1 shows these tentative correlations with what are regarded as the corresponding deposits on the Continent, if it is accepted that Zone II in Windermere corresponds to the Allerod amelioration of Jessen and the other continental workers quoted. It should be noted that the correlation of Zone III in Windermere (upper laminated clay) with both Zone I II in Ireland (the Athdown mountain glaciation) and the formation of the Fennoscandian (Ra) moraines, is confirmed by Farrington's suggested correlation of these two latter periods (Farrington 1945) . In the opinion of most Quaternary geologists there is as yet insufficient evidence for any correlation between the glacial periods of the British Isles and those of Europe, so the only correlations suggested are those for which evidence has been brought forward, and no attempt has been made to suggest any correlation with the Alpine glacial periods, though from those suggested by Gams (1938) and others (Movius 1942; Zeuner 1945 ) the most likely correlation seems to be to regard Zone I, which in Britain is probably equivalent to the Solway Scottish readvance, as equivalent in Europe to the Buhl Stadium or Wiirm III in the Alps. This agrees with the suggestion of Trotter & Hollingworth (1932) , and fits in with what Boswell (1936) and Bisat (1940) regard as the most likely correlation, if it is assumed that the Solway Scottish readvance belonged to the next cold period following the advance of the ice to the York moraines and deposition of the Hunstanton boulder-clay, which they regard as being most probably equivalent to Wiirm II. De Geer (1925 et seq.) considers that 8300 to 7874 b.c. is the probable extent of the cold period during which the ice border was more or less stationary in the region of the Fennoscandian moraines, and that the Allerod layer was probably formed at some time between 10,000 and 8300 b.c. (see also Movius 1942) . The relation of these dates to the time-scale already suggested for the Windermere deposits (Pennington 1943) , based on sedimentation rates, will be discussed in the following section.
( b) Post-glacial. If it is correct to correlate Zone III, the upper laminated clay, with the period of formation of the Fennoscandian moraines, the date of the top of the laminated clay in Windermere is about 7874 b.c. according to De Geer's time-scale. He considers that the post-glacial period began in Sweden with the bipartition of the retreating ice at Ragunda, 1074 years later, i.e. 6800 b .c. Swedish workers (Nilsson 1935) consider that in south Sweden, this was the approximate date of the transition from the period of the hazel maximum to the incoming of the mixed oak forest, and that the peak of the hazel maximum occurred between 7500 and 6800 b .c. Nilsson gives 6200 b.c. as the possible date of the Boreal-Atlantic transition, i.e. the boundary between Zones VI and V II in Godwin's scheme. In the Windermere deposits, this horizon is marked by the very sudden expansion to dominance of Aims, and on the time-scale published for the Windermere deposits (Pennington 1943 ) falls between 6000 and 6300 b .c.
This time-scale for the Windermere deposits was based on the present rate of sedi mentation of mineral matter, knowledge of the water content (i.e. the packing factor) at successive levels in the deposits, and the assumption that the rate of sedimentation of mineral m atter has been approximately constant since the immediately post-glacial stages, but was rapid at the close of the late-glacial period (Pennington 1943) . On this time-scale the date of the top of the laminated clay is about 8560 b .c. compared with 7874 b .c. on De Geer's geochronology. Since the estimate of the present sedimentation rate is probably an under-estimate rather than an over-estimate, and the estimated rate for the late-glacial/ post-glacial transition is somewhat arbitrary, it is not surprising that the above calculation rather over-estimated the length of the period. The Allerod oscillation probably occurred at some time between 10,000 and 8300 b.c. (De Geer etc., see Movius 1942) , and since the laminated clay of Zone I below the Allerod layer is the oldest waterlain deposit, the esti mate of about 12,000 years as the age of the lake (Pennington 1943 ) agrees reasonably well with this. This fairly good agreement between the two time-scales suggests that the assumptions about sedimentation made in the previous paper are reasonably true, in so far as they apply to deep water.
(2) Results of pollen analysis in relation to previous work on the deposits (a) Diatom zonation. When the zonation based on pollen analysis is compared with the diatom zonation already published (Pennington 1943) , some discrepancies are apparent, but a consideration of the conditions of formation of the deposits suggests an explanation of this.
In the late-glacial period, zonation based either on pollen analysis or on the diatom flora corresponds with the sharp stratigraphical boundaries between the lower laminated clay, the detritus silt ('grey layer') and the upper laminated clay. The laminated clays contain few or no organic remains; thus all the available evidence suggests that these, i.e. Zones I and III, represent periods when there was practically no organic production in the lake or vegetation round its shores. The diatom flora of Zone II contains some planktonic species, but the bulk of the diatom population consists of heavy bottom dwelling littoral species, and no diatoms are found at this horizon in deep water. This agrees with the type of diatom population which other workers (Brander 1935 ) have found to be characteristic of cold or cold-temperate periods such as the immediately post-glacial phase in the Baltic region.
A similar diatom population is found in the immediately post-glacial deposits of Windermere, and here the apparent discrepancy between the diatom and pollen zonation arises. The predominantly bottom-dwelling diatom flora, here characterized by arenaria var. hungarica is confined to the clay-gyttja (Zone IV) in shallow water, but appa rently persists throughout the zone of narrow clay bands in deep water. These two deposits were therefore regarded as belonging to the same time-zone, but pollen analysis has shown that the zone of narrow clay bands in deep water includes Zones IV, V and VI, so that only the basal part of this deposit (i.e. that below the lowest clay band) can be equated with the clay gyttja in shallow water. A quantitative survey of the diatom population in deep water, in the deposits between the lowest and the topmost clay band (Pennington 1943, figure 9) shows that the large, mainly bottom-dwelling species, reach their maximum numbers in association with each narrow clay band, i.e. just above or below each band of pure clay. The deposits intervening between the clay bands are, in appearance and organic content, very similar to those of the overlying brown mud (gyttja). It is therefore suggested that the large bottom-dwelling diatoms are here mainly secondarily depositedi.e. that the great floods or breachings of glacial dams in the upper valleys, which produced the clay bands, also carried down these large diatoms from the earlier deposits of smaller, possibly now drained, glacial lakes in the upper valleys of the main inflows.
Above the upper limit of the bottom-dwelling diatom flora characterized by Melosira arenaria var. hungarica, the diatom flora is very uniform, and no further zones could be distinguished until the Asterionella ooze was reached. Pollen analysis has provided a method by which certain horizons in the upper gyttja deposits can now be recognized.
(b) Stratigraphicalresults. T h e contribution o f pollen analysis to the elucidation o f the late-glacial stratigraphy has been to confirm the view th a t the period o f in terru p tio n in the regular varve deposition w hich in shallow w ater led to the form ation o f detritus silt was in fact a tem porarily w arm er clim atic period. Since the lam inated clays contain practically no pollen or organic rem ains, any possible explanation of the m arked irregu larities sometimes found in the deep-w ater lam inated clays m ust aw ait fu rth er geological investigation, notably of the varve sequences. These irregularities m ay be due to channels in the late-glacial deposits, grounding of icebergs, the presence of persistent blocks o f dead ice, or to slum ping of the deposited clays sim ilar to th a t described in Palaeozoic subm arine clays (H eim , 1908) .
The evidence of pollen zonation shows that the immediately post-glacial deposits of Zone IV were, like the late-glacial Zone II, deposited much more rapidly at the margins than in the middle of the lake, where Zone II is not represented by any deposit and Zone IV is very narrow. The material forming these two zones was therefore presumably derived from littoral erosion, and possibly, during the colder parts of the periods, from solifluction. In Zones V and VI, on the transect investigated, the deposits at the margins are consider ably thicker than those in the centre, but the difference between marginal and central thickness is less than in the earlier zones. The truncation of the marginal profiles 3 to 4 m. below the water surface suggests that however much material is available, no further accumulation takes place on a stony shore such as Low Wray Bay once this water depth is reached. The material forming the deep-water deposits is probably derived chiefly from the main inflow and organic production within the lake; this would at least partially explain the relatively slow accumulation in Zone IV, 10 to 15 cm. in about 400 yearsfirst because it would be expected that at this early stage in the lake's post-glacial history the bulk of the sediment entering the lake by the inflow would be coarse and hence rapidly deposited in the delta region (Pearsall 1921 etc.; Kindle 1930) , and secondly because both the low temperature and the low concentration of nutrient salts would restrict organic production in the lake (Pearsall 1921, etc.) . If the above time estimate is correct, the average annual increment in Zone IV is seen to be about 0-2 to 0-3 mm., and the water content of this deposit is about 5 0 %, while at present in this position the annual increment is about 2'5 mm. with a water content of 9 3 % ; the ratio of sedimentation rates of solid m atter in the immediately post-glacial period to that at present is therefore about 1:10 in annual thickness, and 5 :7 in volume of solid m atter deposited. The corresponding ratio for the amount of carbon deposited per annum is 1 : 7. This means that the sediment accumulating in the middle of the lake each year in immediately post-glacial times was of about five-sevenths the volume of solid m atter and about one-seventh the volume of organic m atter of the sediment accumulating at present. The previous assumption (Pennington 1943 ) that sedimentation of mineral m atter was relatively rapid in this immediately post-glacial period is therefore proved to be wrong when applied to the middle of the lake; only at the margins and probably in the delta region is it true.
The work described in this paper has been made possible by grants from the Royal Society and the Freshwater Biological Association. I am greatly indebted to Dr H. Godwin, F.R.S., for his continued and stimulating interest in the work.
position in the international arachnological community and among Bulgarian zoologists. Th is we did during the celebration of his anniversary at the National Museum of Natural History.
Christo Deltshev was born on January 22, 1939 in Sofi a. More than two thirds of the seventy years, which have passed since then, he devoted to the study of spiders, fi rst as a speleologist and then as a professional scientist with the Institute of Zoology. His father Deltcho Deltshev was from Komotini (now in northern Greece) and his mother Victoria Gospodinova was from Sofi a. Even as a pupil Christo (or Itso as most of his friends and colleagues call him) showed great interest in nature, and in the parks of Sofi a and Vitosha Mountain he collected diff erent insects and spiders, which then he brought home in shoe boxes to look after them. At school his interest in animals grew stronger and he became the head of the biology group. Th e anti-communist inclinations of his father had a negative aff ect on the way Christo's life would turn out. At the time of fi erce repressions by the Communist party the son of the former convict was subject to great pressure. Despite his wish, he was not allowed to study at the university and after he served in the army from 1957 to 1959 he was forced to start as a common worker.
Luckily, at that particular time the law was changed and after successfully passing the exams in 1960, Christo Deltshev was accepted as a student at the University of Sofi a. It was then that he met a group of ardent speleologists -Petar Tranteev, Vassil Guéorgiev, Petar Beron, Vladimir Beshkov, Tanyu Michev, Stoitze Andreev and Alexi Popov -and with them he started exploring the caves of Bulgaria and their fauna. Th is helped him make an important decision -to devote his scientifi c interests to spiders. Almost fi fty years have passed since then and Christo Deltshev is still collecting, observing, describing and studying spiders with the same vigour and passion.
He received his fi rst instructions on the organization and conduct of scientifi c research and an acquaintance with diff erent methods from Dr. Ivan Buresch, member of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences and founder of contemporary zoology and biospeleology in Bulgaria. He acquainted him with the work of Associate Professor Dr. Pencho Drensky, and gave Christo reprints of the publications by this eminent Bulgarian arachnologist and part of his bibliography fi les on spiders. Years later, as a sign of respect to his mentor Deltshev (1975 [12] 1 ) named a newly discovered cave spider Troglohyphantes bureschianus. At the same time, at the beginning of 1962, he got to know Pencho Drensky himself, who gave him his fi rst lessons in araneology. Unfortunately, due to the death of P. Drensky just a few months later, Christo lost the opportunity to share with him his ideas on spider studies and hear his advice.
Christo Deltshev received his degree from the Invertebrate Zoology Department of the St. Kliment Ohridsky University of Sofi a in 1965 with a thesis entitled "Th e spiders (Araneae) of Vitosha Mountain". Th at same year he was appointed as a biologist at the Institute of Zoology with the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences (then 1 Th e number in the square brackets after each citation designates the serial number from the List of Christo Deltshev's publications at the end of the paper.
Institute of Zoology and Museum), where he still works to this day. From 1972 to 1985 he was an Assistant Professor. His PhD thesis, which he defended in 1977, was entitled "Faunistic, taxonomic, ecological and zoogeographical investigations on the cave spiders of Bulgaria (Araneae)". Since 1985 he has been an Associate Professor. Th e director of the Institute of Zoology appreciated his organizational and management skills and in 1995 Christo Deltshev was elected head of the Department of Taxonomy, Faunistics and Zoogeography. He has occupied this position ever since. Two years later he was appointed Secretary of the Scientifi c Council of Zoology and Ecology with the High Attestation Commission. As an administrator he is still involved with the organization and procedures for thesis defense by zoologists and ecologists in Bulgaria. His work for the Council puts him in touch with many young people who share with him their passion for zoology. With his typical responsiveness and friendliness he was able to help many of them on diff erent occasions; indeed it is hard to fi nd anyone among the Bulgarian zoological community who doesn't know Christo Deltshev.
His valuable scientifi c results derive from his qualities and perseverance as a fi eld researcher. He has been connected with nature his whole life and is well acquainted with the Bulgarian mountains. We, the authors of this biography, had to overcome together with him storms, fog and hail and we know that his desire for explorations of caves and mountains is inextinguishable. In sunny and in stormy weather he never loses his good spirits.
Th e head of the Institute of Zoology, Professor Alexander Valkanov, took Christo, just after he started work, to his summer expeditions to explore the high-mountain lakes of Rila and Pirin. During one of these expeditions to the Seven Rila Lakes, together with German hydrobiologists, one evening at the camp fi re he found out that Christo was a fi re-dancer. Fire-dancing is an ancient folk custom from Strandzha Mountain in south-east Bulgaria during which the dancers -in a trance-like state -dance bare-foot over live coals. To the professor's question "Will you do it?" Christo took off his shoes, set the glowing embers ready, went around them and then several times walked over the still glowing coal. "I have lived to see this miracle as well!", Professor Valkanov exclaimed, and was amazed to see there were no burn marks on Christo's feet. Christo's participation in Professor Valkanov's expeditions stirred his interest in the fauna of the high-mountain spiders of Bulgaria.
In the beginning of his scientifi c career he established cooperation with arachnologists from other countries (Carl Friedrich Roewer and Hermann Wiehle from Germany, Pierre Bonnet and Louis Fage from France, Josef Kratochvil and František Miller from the former Czechoslovakia, Herbert Levi from the USA). In 1972 he described his fi rst spider Protoleptoneta bulgarica, which turned out to be both a new genus and species. To make sure he was not mistaken he sought the opinion of Paolo Marcello Brignolli and František Miller, who were at the time among the best taxonomists of this group in Europe. Years later, already an established spider expert himself, Dr. Deltshev advised young zoologists during their fi rst steps in araneology and confi rmed the new species they had discovered.
Christo's love for caves started during his university years. Th e fi rst cave he visited was Kolkina Dupka at the village of Zimevitsa in the Stara Planina Mountain. When entering this precipice cave in 1960, he had to clamber over the corpses of several dead pigs. Th e more experienced cavers who were leading him saw that he did not shrink at the unpleasant sight and realized the boy would turn out to be a true speleologist. And so he did. His infatuation with caves did not diminish with time, even after an incident of almost tragic proportions took place. In August 1964, when he was climbing down the Bankovitsa abyss at Karlukovo village near Lukovit, several of the rungs of the self-made rope ladder broke and Christo fell 12 metres. His hip was broken in fi ve pieces and he had to spend four months in cast, with recovery taking another four months. From then on, throughout his life the injury tormented him whenever the weather got worse or when he strained himself, but it did not stop Christo from continuing his researches in high mountains and caves or from enjoying nature as a tourist with his family and friends.
Th us it was no wonder that it was in a cave that Christo held his wedding. It happened in 1968 in Temnata Dupka Cave in Iskar Gorge near Lakatnik. Christo had already graduated and started working as a researcher and thought it was time to start a family. And so Elena entered his life and she would become the pillar and support of his further progress. Th ey had three children, one after another, which was a rare case for a family of intellectuals in Bulgaria during the second half of the 20th century.
So far Dr. Deltshev has visited and studied the fauna of several hundred caves in Bulgaria. He discovered some of them and for many he was among their fi rst explorers. He participated in the organization of many international, national and club caving expeditions. As well as Bulgaria, Christo also took part in international caving expeditions in Slovenia (1963), the Caucasus (1967), Austria (1968) and the Moravian karst in the Czech Republic (1980). His achievements in speleology were largely due to the infl uence which the inspirer of the speleological movement in Bulgaria, Petar Tranteev, had on him. Christo proposed to him his idea to make ascenders, which were produced by Vesselin Gyaurov, and Christo tested them himself. His speleological organizational work concerns the Bulgarian Federation of Speleology -of w hich he was the vice-chairman from 1968 until 1993 -as well as the Academic Students' Speleological Club of which he was the chairman in the period 1978-1996. Since 1972 Christo Deltshev has taught a speleology course in the National Sports Academy and is the author of a textbook on speleology.
Christo is a friendly guy. He likes to entertain his colleagues and friends with stories of his expeditions and interesting things he had witnessed. For many years he used to dress like Santa Claus and give away presents to cavers in some mountain hut, and now he is doing this for the children and grandchildren of his colleagues.
In his more than 40 years of scientifi c research the araneological contributions of Christo Deltshev have been many in number. Th e main areas of his work and publications are taxonomy, faunistics, zoogeography and ecology of spiders in Bulgaria and the other Balkan countries. He has described as new the genera Protoleptoneta and Cryphoecina, as well as 34 species and 2 subspecies of spiders from 8 families. Th e largest number of taxa described by him belongs to the families Linyphiidae (17 species and 2 subspecies), Agelenidae (6 species), Leptonetidae (1 genus and 3 species) and Amaurobiidae (3 species). If we look at the genera, the largest number of newly described taxa belong to Centromerus (4 species and 1 subspecies), Malthonica (4 species), Lepthyphantes and Eurocoelotes (3 species each). Christo is a skilled illustrator and this gift largely helps his taxonomic work. Th e scale of his contributions can be judged also by the fact that all but one of the 38 taxa have been described by him alone. And the quality of his contribution can be estimated by the validity of all the described taxa; again with only one exception (Lepthyphantes gueorguievi has been synonymized). Th e newly described taxa all come from the Balkan Peninsula: Bulgaria (1 genus, 24 species and 2 subspecies), Greece (7 species), Serbia (2 species), Montenegro (1 genus and 1 species). Almost an equal number of the new taxa have been found in caves (16 species) and in mountains (17 species and subspecies), and another 3 species along the coast and in the lowlands. His permanent interest in taxonomy is evident from the even distribution of newly described taxa throughout time: 1970s (12 taxa), 1980s (10 taxa), 1990s (9 taxa) and the fi rst decade of the 21st century (9 species).
Christo Deltshev has conducted some other taxonomic modifi cations such as the establishment of 25 new synonyms and designation of lectotypes of 7 species. He revised the genus Tenuiphantes, the European species of Bolyphantes, the species of Centromerus in the caves of the Balkan Peninsula, and the genera Erigone, Tegenaria, Coelotes and Zodarion in Bulgaria. He also critically revised the spider species of the Balkan Peninsula described by Dr. P. Drensky (Deltshev 2003 [111] ). Considerable too are his faunistic contributions to the distribution of spiders across the Balkan countries. Due to his research over many years the number of known species in Bulgaria increased by 237, in Serbia -by 73, in Macedonia (FYROM) -by 22 and in Greece by 11. He also discovered two families (one still unpublished) new for the fauna of Bulgaria. Another aspect of his contribution is the complex research and analysis of the araneofauna from the diff erent regions of Bulgaria. An excellent fi eld researcher, he conducted and published his studies on the spiders of the mountains Central Stara Planina, Rila, Pirin, the Eastern Rhodopes, Lyulin, Vitosha and Sashtinska Sredna Gora; of plain areas in Bulgaria such as the Black Sea Coast and Ludogorie; of some small but zoogeographically interesting territories such as Srebarna Lake, Shabla-Ezerets wetland, the Sofi a Region, Zemen and Kresna gorges and Sandanski-Petrich Kettle.
Th e climax of Christo Deltshev's work on the study of spiders in the northern part of the Balkan Peninsula are the critical checklist of Bulgarian spiders (Deltshev and Blagoev 2001 [104] ) and the monograph "Th e Spiders of Serbia" (Deltshev et al. 2003 [113] ). Th e checklist contains 910 species according to data based on 173 publications. It has been updated with an online list (Blagoev et al. 2002 [107] ) containing up-to-date current information on 1007 species in 41 families based on the review of 226 items of literature. Th e monograph constitutes a critical catalogue of 618 species of 36 families based on all the literature fi ndings and new data from intensive faunistic research in Serbia. Th e localities of each species are plotted on a UTM map.
Zoogeography has always interested Christo Deltshev and because of this almost all of his taxonomic works are accompanied by a zoogeographic analysis. In his analysis of spiders of the Balkan Peninsula (Deltshev 1999 [87] ) he concentrated on 1409 species from 47 families and selected the regions with the highest species diversity. In this research he established that 26.9 % of spiders (379 species) are endemic for the region and proved the important role of the Balkan Peninsula as a speciation center in Europe. Similar zoogeographic analyses have been published on the spiders of Bulgaria as well (Deltshev 2005 [124] ), on endemic spiders of Bulgaria (Deltshev 1996 [67] ) and the Balkan Peninsula (Deltshev 2000 [94] ), and on troglobitic spiders of the Balkan Peninsula (Deltshev 1978 [20] , 2008 [132] ).
Some ecological problems also received Christo Deltshev's attention. He studied the population structure of spiders inhabiting cave entrances (Deltshev 1973 [7] ) and researched the impact of pasture management on the number and biomass of spiders (Deltshev and Kajak 1974 [11] ). He is interested in the factors which determine the assemblage structure of spiders (Popov et al. 2000 [102] ). In the sphere of applied zoology he compared the biodiversity of spiders in genetically modifi ed and conventional potato fi elds (Kalushkov et al. 2008 [134] ).
In the last 15 years Dr. Deltshev has carried out intensive studies on the issues regarding the protection of invertebrates in Bulgaria. He is one of the leading experts in drafting the National Strategy for Biodiversity Conservation of Invertebrates (Deltshev et al. 1998 [82] ) and identifi ed the conservation signifi cance of spiders in the main protected territories in Bulgaria: the three national parks and some of the nature parks.
Th e overall number of publications by Dr. Deltshev as of June 2009 (including that in press) is 140. It includes the monograph "Spiders of Serbia" (Deltshev et al. 2003 [113] ), a textbook on speleology and caving (Deltshev 1979 [23] ) and books of popular science "Th e descendants of Arachna" (Deltshev 1988 [47] ) and "Biodiversity of Pirin National Park" (Popov et al. 2005 [122] ). Several practical faunistic methods have been introduced into Bulgaria by Christo Deltshev. He introduced UTM mapping (Lehrer and Deltshev 1978 [21] ), which is actively used even now by Bulgarian zoologists. Together with colleagues he proposed methods of collecting, managing and recording faunistic information (Deltshev et al. 1998 [86] ), which are also widely used, particularly in studies of biodiversity protection.
Th ere are not so many Bulgarian zoologists who, like Dr. Deltshev, have established their own school of followers. A group has emerged which jointly continues the study of spiders in Bulgaria. He has been the advisor of 4 PhD and 8 graduate students. Two of his PhD students have successfully defended their theses on araneological topics and are currently research associates with the Institute of Zoology in Sofi a and the Biodiversity Institute of Ontario in Guelph, Canada. Christo is also an advisor to young zoologists from other Balkan countries. One of the aspects of Christo Deltshev's international activities is his participation in the major arachnological and related associations. He became a member of the International Society of Arachnology (ISA), now seated in Berlin, almost from its beginnings 45 years ago, and he is currently the regional representative for Bulgaria for this most prestigious organization of arachnologists. Christo is also a member of the European Society of Arachnology (ESA), seated in Nancy (France), where he is now a member of the society's Council. In the European Invertebrate Survey (EIS), registered in the Netherlands, he is a member of the organization's Committee and he is also member of Arachnologische Gesellschaft (AraGes) seated in Bayreuth (Germany).
His Arachnologists and biospeleologists from diff erent countries have described species which they named after Christo Deltshev in acknowledgement of his work. Altogether, one genus and 13 species bear Christo's name. Nine of the species are spiders, there is one harvestman, one millipede and 2 beetles.
Th e celebration of Christo Deltshev's anniversary at the National Museum of Natural History took place in the hall with a temporary exhibition called Spider Museum -an appropriate backdrop for the evaluation of his work. Th e results of his work reveal Dr. Deltshev to be an excellent araneologist, acknowledged as one of the most promi- nent European spider taxonomists. It is thanks to him that the Institute of Zoology possesses a perfectly arranged collection of spiders and database on their distribution across the Balkan countries.
In the year of Christo Deltshev's anniversary we wish him further success as a researcher, administrator and mentor to young researchers. New spider species are yet to be discovered and described by Christo, and more territories on the Balkan Peninsula await his study. 

Complete or partial loss of teeth is very common clinical condition. The etiologies of missing teeth are several but commonest causes are dental caries, periodontal diseases & injury. 1 Loss of teeth may not only affect the oral impairments & loss of alveolar bone but also reduced self-confidence & general health.
2 Traditionally partial edentulous conditions are rehabilitated by removable partial dentures, fixed partial dentures & complete edentulous condition by complete denture. But in these above treatment options are several short & long term problems like pain, discomfort during speech & mastication, bone loss under pontic area, dental caries in abutment teeth. Due to several modern development of in the field of dental implant, it is one of the most predictable treatment options for partial or complete edentulism. In today's era patients need the immediate replacement of missing teeth in shorter duration of time & in more predictable way. In traditional Implantology technique required 4 to 6 months to rehabilitate the edentulous state with prosthesis. But due to several development in the field implant dentistry like several modification in implant thread design, surface treatments, immediate surgical protocol, advancement in imaging & lab technology, immediate bone augmentations material & techniques, implant placement with temporization, one piece compressive & Basal implants all these developments make the treatment in shorter duration of time with less surgical steps in minimal invasive way.
3 But the biological principle is very much essential to determine the treatment option is suitable for particular clinical scenario. As modern Implantology is prosthetic driven, recent developments affect the immediate rehabilitation of esthetics & rapid restoration of implant fixtures. As for professionals and publically, the fast & fixed methodology of implant treatment has both risks and benefits.
The usefulness of the implant dentistry trends discussed above is yet to be determined. However, with time some of these innovations becomes trends & others as historical sidenotes.so as a clinician, we always rely on biologic principles as well as long term clinical investigations to select the implants, surgical & prosthetic techniques. The most of newer materials & techniques are good enough but long term multicentric studies are required to establish the facts.
Consent for participation in health research in low income countries is imbued with many widely documented complexities. These include difficulties in explaining and understanding research terminologies [1] [2] [3] , participants joining research primarily to access much needed health care [2, [4] [5] [6] , and involvement and influence of family and other community members in individual decision-making [7, 8] . Although consent remains a core theme in research ethics, the extent to which entirely autonomous individual informed consent is possible, or even desirable, is an area of on-going ethical debate particularly in highly communal and patriarchal communities [9, 10] .
Numerous guidelines and documents describe strategies to strengthen consent processes in an effort to meet key ethical principles of respect to persons and communities. A common recommendation is that consent be seen as a process [11, 12] , and that research involves several layers of communication and consultation with host communities in addition to individual consent processes [13, 14] . The relationship between community engagement (CE) and individual consent processes is far from straightforward. For example, while community engagement can facilitate improved knowledge of a study in the host population [14] [15] [16] , too much information has the potential to lead to key research information being crowded out [13, 17] , and for people to feel obliged to participate in research in order for the community to gain benefits provided in research [18] .
In some situations, involving a potential participant's partner or other relative ('significant other') in decision-making is recommended [1, [19] [20] [21] . However there is relatively little research on the nature of consultations between individuals and their significant others, the influence of such consultations on decisions, or the ethical importance of such influences in low income settings. These are important areas to explore since the nature of negotiations between research staff, potential participants, and their significant others can vary considerably from simple information giving to interactions where clear power asymmetries and potential for coercion exist. A particular research gap concerns decision-making in research 'decliners', not least because this information is practically and ethically challenging to collect [22, 23] .
Within these complex and negotiated processes, the staff who undertake informed consent, often called frontline research staff or fieldworkers (FWs), play a key role. It is widely recognised that employing fieldworkers from study communities is essential for many research studies [24, 25] . Beyond conducting consent processes in the first language of potential participants, FWs take on many other important roles-formally or informally-including: conducting relatively straightforward research procedures such as simple surveys and health checks [26, 27] ; providing access to hard-to-reach populations such as stigmatized or hidden populations [28] ; advising researchers on local priorities, concerns, and culturally appropriate conduct of research including consent [29] and acting as 'cultural brokers' between the often very different worlds of researchers and research communities. A growing body of literature about such frontline workers suggests that their roles are imbued with diverse and ever-changing ethical challenges with important implications for consent processes [30] [31] [32] [33] . For example, some frontline staff may be motivated by their wish to help their communities [24, 27] , with potentially positive and negative implications for consent processes, including excessively encouraging research participation in contexts of constrained public health care systems [33] . Where fieldworkers are already well known within communities, there is potential for them to exploit this trust to meet recruitment quotas, and for confidentiality to be compromised [26, 27] . Given their central role in ethical consent processes, there is increasing recognition of the need to appropriately support fieldworkers in their community interactions; and for research guidelines and ethics frameworks to build on their experiences.
Many documents aimed at strengthening consent processes include a core assumption that potential participants will-at some point in the process-explicitly agree or refuse to join a proposed study. Those who agree can then later change their minds [34] . However, a clearly stated decision may not be a reality. For example, in a previous study in Kenya, community members were argued to exert agency during interactions with relatively well-resourced researchers and institutions through a number of strategies that included 'silent refusals'; that is, hesitating to participate without explicitly refusing [31, 35] . In this paper we present one theme-'silent refusal'-that emerged from a broader social science study which explored the nature of interactions between fieldworkers and participants in two community-based studies in coastal Kenya. We describe the nature of silent refusals as it emerged in the community based studies, how fieldworkers encountered the silent refusal, the challenges and dilemmas they faced in handling silent refusals. We further make some recommendations for consent processes and for support to fieldworkers.
The study was carried out in a long-standing international research centre, the KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme (KWTRP); established on the Kenyan Coast since 1989 and with branches in other parts of the country including Nairobi (http://www.kemri-wellcome. org/). At the Coast, KWTRP is hosted at the Kilifi County Hospital (KCH), with research and support for Ministry of Health (MOH) services conducted in tandem. The centre runs a Health and Demographic Surveillance System (KHDSS) including about 260,000 residents living around KCH, representing the geographic area in which most studies are conducted in Kilifi [36] .
All studies conducted by the Programme are approved by the national scientific and ethics review committees in addition to institutional-and where necessary external-review committees [37] . A comprehensive community engagement includes programme-wide and study specific activities [38] . A group of staff, the Community Liaison Group (CLG), consisting of experienced community facilitators, coordinates centre-wide community engagement activities, and advises all studies on community engagement at every stage of a study. Issues arising from the community are fed back to relevant departments and study Principal Investigators (PIs).
Fieldworkers are the largest group of staff at the research centre, forming nearly a third of the staff [31] . They are often recruited from the community where a study is conducted. Their main roles include communicating about studies, undertaking consent processes and following-up participants at their homes.
The data presented in this paper were collected as part of a wider social science study aimed at exploring the nature of interactions between fieldworkers and research participants in community-based studies, the challenges that fieldworkers faced, and if and how these were resolved. We purposively selected two community based studies for this broader social science study using criteria presented in Table 1 . Fig 1shows the flowchart of the selections of the two studies from a total of 66 active studies at the research centre at the time, of which 16 were community-based studies. The two community-based studies selected were: study involving eleven sites in seven African countries; this qualitative research focused on the Kilifi site.
The key features of the two community-based studies are published elsewhere [39] and summarised in Table 2 , including the main research questions each for each study, type of participants, locality, study team composition, study benefits and risks.
A total of 36 'Junior' FWs and 6 Senior FWs were employed across these case studies. All 'Junior' fieldworkers came from and resided within the study population, and most were male (7/10 and 25/26 in the RSV-and Malaria-study respectively). Their main roles included sharing initial study information with potential participants and carrying out follow-up activities.
The social scientists carrying out this study were independent of the case study research teams. DK had over 8 years of managing and coordinating community engagement activities, training and providing support to fieldworkers at the research centre, with support from SM and VM. This knowledge, experience and relationships were important in building trust and being aware of different perceptions informing the findings. The main data collection methods were participant observation, natural and focus group discussions and individual in-depth interviews. All the immediate study team members in the two community based studies, that is, 'Junior' fieldworkers (n = 36), senior fieldworkers (n = 6), study Principal Investigators (n = 2) and study coordinator (n = 1) and were interviewed. In addition, we interviewed purposively selected participants in each case study. Table 3 shows the demographic characteristic of the respondents interviewed in this social science study.
Participant observation provided first-hand information of the context in which FWs worked and the type and nature of interactions between FWs and different householders. DK carried out participant observations for a total of 4 months in the RSV-study and 1 month in the Malaria-study, and attended 12 and 4 study meetings respectively. She visited 19 households in the RSV-study and 30 participant households in the Malaria-study; and accompanied all 10 RSV 'Junior' FWs and 9/26 Malaria-Study 'Junior' FWs during their daily work. Considerable time was spent the first study selected for the social science study-in the RSV-study-to get deeper understanding of the range and depth of issues in FW-participant interactions. Less time was spent in the Malaria-study as the aim was to explore the extent to which findings from RSV-study were generalisable to a different type of community-based study in the same context.
A total of 11 focus group discussions (FGDs) with 64 respondents, 5 natural group discussions with 16 respondents and 7 in-depth interviews with 4 respondents were held (Table 4) . Natural group discussions were held with adult household members all participating in case study A, as this approach was one way of exploring household decision-making dynamics [40] . The advantage of natural group discussions is that members already know one another, and have established some norms of working as a group, which the research can gather insights from. Because some of the topics we explored in these natural groups turned out to be sensitive (such as household decision-making dynamics), we used FGDs in subsequent interviews. Respondent-households in the RSV-study were selected from the 19 households DK had previously visited during her participant observation. In this way, DK was not a total stranger Participants Entire household in a defined locality with an infant born after previous RSV epidemic and at least one elder sibling to the infant. Household defined as all members of a homestead who share at least one meal a day.
Children aged 6-12 weeks and 5-17 months at first vaccination; 16,000 children across the 11 sites, a minimum of 6,000 in each of the age category. For Kilifi site, allocated total of 900 children, 600 and 300 in the 5-17 months 6-12 weeks group respectively.
Study procedures Follow-up visits at home every 3-4 days; data from each HH member collected at each visit included:
Randomisation to one of three groups; Experimental malaria vaccine and its booster at 1. Flocked oral swab (taken at alternate visits (once a week).A demographic and risk assessment questionnaire administered at beginning and end of the study.
Procedures: Initial physical examination, medical history, anthropometric tests, temperature; three vaccine doses each a month apart, and booster dose at 34 months; 5 scheduled blood samples over 3 years; each 2.5mls; Monitoring of minor and serious adverse; immediate and over time; 6 consecutive followup visits post-vaccination days at home. Monitoring of minor and serious adverse events; Referral to nearest health facility for illnesses, and to KCH for serious illnesses.
Mild discomfort during NSF taking, and time inconveniences. Detailed side effects as is typical of vaccines trials provided in the study protocol and informed consent; includes severe (such as convulsions, diarrhoea) and mild events (e.g. pain, swelling at vaccination site).
For participants: Free medical care for all common illnesses during study period; clinical visits to every participating household once a month at home.
For participants: Free health care for all conditions (chronic, acute, vaccine related or otherwise, injuries), throughout the study period (about 3 years). This includes:
Other benefits/token staggered throughout the study period included two chairs to each household, sweets, educational materials and token** at end of study.
Free referral for specialized treatment where required, all costs at government facilities covered while transport is provided for first visit to non-government facilities.
All transport to and from the hospital provided by the study team and meals provided for participant and accompanying parents/ guardian for al clinic visits.
Community benefits: boosting local health services through provision of drugs, additional clinical staff. Water treatment for all communal water points
Community benefits: Boosting of three health facilities where the study is based; renovation of existing buildings, providing equipment's; boosting of health staff, provision of essential drugs.
Provision of emergency medical aid during cholera epidemic including drugs, staff, referrals.
*These staff were shared with other studies within the department **Token given at the end of the study were said to be the study teams appreciation to participants for having persevered until the end of the study. They included educational materials, food items, clothes to family members and had some idea of the household dynamics. Within this group, households were purposively selected to reflect diversity based on gender and household arrangements (extended and nuclear families). Respondent-households in the Malaria-study were purposively selected from the geographical area surrounding each of the three health facilities in which the trial was being conducted. FGDs were held separately with male and female respondents to address sensitivities around gender roles and household decision-making for research, as noted above. In both case studies, discussions were held with the study team members separately; that is fieldworkers and senior fieldworkers, study coordinator and principal investigators. Written informed consent was sought from interviewees in their preferred language. One RSV household refused to participate and did not want to disclose the reason.
Data collection continued until a point of saturation where no new themes were emerging. Data analysis started as soon as the first interviews were transcribed and cleaned, and continued throughout the study. All cleaned transcripts were uploaded into Nvivo Version 8.0, the software we used to organize and manage the data. Immediately after each step of data collection, DK and SM printed and read the transcripts, identified emerging issues from each transcript, and DK made summaries. We chose the most informative fieldworker FGD for initial open coding in Nvivo Version 8.0, as it would provide the most variable themes and categories [41] . Data under each open code were grouped into descriptive themes, and codes were merged, deleted and created as more transcripts were added [42] . Through this iterative process of analysis further areas of enquiry were identified and incorporated into subsequent question guides. The descriptive codes were further grouped into broader analytical themes. DK and SM independently coded initial transcripts and compared these with those of another independent researcher. The framework so developed was discussed with ST, PWG, VM and MP. To safeguard participants' privacy and confidentiality, all individual identifiers were replaced with codes in transcripts and in write ups. Summary findings were presented to different cadres of staff in the case studies and to researchers at the centre, as part of validating the findings.
This study was approved by the local and national Institutional review Boards (IRB); the KEMRI Scientific Steering (SSC) committee and the KEMRI Ethics Review Committee (ERC), SCC protocol number 1463. 
Setting the scene for silent refusals: How were consent processes negotiated in the two case studies?
Individual and household consent processes in the case studies changed over time in response to practical challenges the teams encountered. For example, the RSV study initially sought consent from all adults in a household and assent from minors, but over time, the importance of gaining initial permission specifically from male household heads was recognised (Fig 2) . For the Malaria study, the community facilitators in the CLG initially shared information about the trial to groups of potential participants as part of Community engagement activities for that trial. This was followed by parental consent by a clinician at the health facility (Fig 3) . Over time and once the FWs had been trained in the trial details the FWs took the role of explaining the trial to potential participant. Study benefits provided in case studies (See Table 2 ) were highly appreciated constantly discussed and negotiated, and ultimately contributed centrally to whether participants joined and remained in studies. Particularly appreciated were the high quality and prompt health care services given, and the respectful way research staff handled participants. Food and transport for participants and guardians during follow-up visits (Malaria-study) and provision of chairs, educational materials, and first aid to the whole community during a cholera epidemic (RSVstudy), were seen as responding appropriately to community needs. However, such provisions also seemed to contribute to expectations of ever-increasing benefits, and potential jealousies between participants and non-participants.
Concerns and worries which fed into continuous negotiations in the two studies included the safety of Nasopharyngeal Flocked Swabs (NFS) which were taken twice a week from all household members for 6 months (RSV-study), the safety of the malaria vaccine, concerns over blood samples (Malaria-study), and about the nature and motivation of the work of KWTRP.
Across community engagement activities, consent, daily research activities and study completion, DK observed constant discussions around benefits, and of participants' concerns and worries of being involved in the studies. A particular challenge for FWs was how to handle (potential) participants who repeatedly postponed consent decisions or who participated inconsistently. These were often referred to as 'silent refusals' by study teams and across the research programme.
Silent refusals: What are they and how did they emerge?
Silent refusals were observed during consent processes and over the course of studies. During consent processes, 'silent refusal' was used to describe the behaviour of those who appeared positive about participation, but kept postponing their final decision, often with very 'good' reasons. For example, some mothers requested extended periods to consult their husbands, mothers-in-law, or other family members, even when these individuals had already agreed to research participation. The need to involve others was expected and encouraged, and to avoid putting undue pressure on individuals, FWs were trained to follow up to a maximum of 3 times before categorising this response as a refusal. However FWs found it difficult to adhere to this guidance where individuals really appeared interested to participate, but did not make a commitment. Post-consent, a 'silent refusal' was used to describe those who participated in some but not all study procedures, but who appeared reluctant to withdraw from studies. They often had credible reasons for their inconsistent participation that did not suggest a desire to withdraw: ". . . but the way they were telling you is that, even you (FW) go in the morning and you tell them (participants) 'the vehicle is coming, prepare yourself'. . .and she tells you 'there is no problem'. . . . and you go there with the vehicle, and when you arrive there she says 'aaah I have remembered I have a visitor, so I will not come to the dispensary'" (FW1_male_FGD10).
Initially FWs found it difficult to discern a silent refusal, but over time, as they got to know individuals and households better, this pattern became easier to identify. As one FW pointed out using a popular Kiswahili proverb:
". . .I have truly known that akufukuzae hakwambii toka [the one who chases you away does not tell you go]. . . you have to understand them according to their actions or words then you completely know that this person does not want to participate" (FW1_male_FGD05).
Why silently refuse? The reasons for silent refusals appeared to fall under three broad inter-related categories: avoiding conflicts in the household and with significant others; safeguarding relationships between participants and FWs/KWTRP; and ensuring continued access to study benefits.
Avoiding conflicts and safeguarding relations within households. A silent refusal was described as a norm when politely refusing people who were strangers, or who are highly respected. An outright refusal is perceived as being rude. Being polite is seen as a good in itself, and as an investment in kindness and generosity for future situations of need, even from strangers. ". . . so you don't want to refuse someone's request because it's like you are unaweka akiba [investing] so that another day someone will be kind to you" (FW3_male_FGD06).
Within households, showing respect-especially to household heads and elders-is highly valued. Children and women should show this through obeying. A silent refusal is a way to disagree with elders and household heads respectfully, without openly disobeying them. With regards to research consent, decisions about household and children's participation in research were often made by male household members, even where consultations did take place. Those most affected by participation, often women charged with taking children for follow up procedures, wanted to be actively involved in making decisions about joining studies. Where this did not happen, silent refusals appeared to be a subtle strategy to covertly exercise agency. As a mother narrated, women would often only cooperate in studies involving their children if they supported the decision or would use different tactics to avoid research participation.
". . .the mother is the one who will get hold of the child as blood is being drawn. If the father agrees for the child to participate but the mother refuses then you (mother) won't send the child. You may go and stay outside and then go back (home) with your child and say the child has missed the vaccines or you say the child has been attended; but you will just be cheating. . . . you will hold the child during bleeding, you look at her as she cries, but you will only do so if you have decided. . ." (Pax2_female_FGD12).
In these instances, silent refusal was used by women as a short term strategy to mask a genuine refusal to participate in ways that did not cause rifts within households. The same strategy was used by younger men towards older male household members or heads.
". . . So the thing is if like that one (a silent refusal), he could not out rightly say that he had withdrawn because he is not the household head, his elder brother [the household head] fully participates in the study. . ." (FW4_male_FGD06).
It seemed that male participants were aware that their wives (and minors) used silent refusals to delay, and sometimes influence, their decisions; but felt unable to do anything about it. Instead they seemed to blame women and minors for not understanding the importance of the health care 'assistance' provided by KWTRP.
"Yes, as the husband you can consent, and the wife can go as if going to the dispensary and because of ignorance (not knowing) you can be saying the child has been sent (to the dispensary). . . but in fact he has not been enrolled in the study. And if she comes to the dispensary, she does other things. So because of that they (study researchers) keep waiting for her and they get tired. . ." (Pax6_male_FGD13)
An additional concern was reported widespread jealousy of husbands toward male FWs, given the latters' relatively well-paid jobs at KWTRP. Some men felt uneasy with male FWs visiting their wives at home, especially in the evening. Similarly, some female participants described being careful in associating with male FWs given these potential conflicts, instead choosing to participate in studies when their husbands were away-in order to access study benefits-and refusing at other times.
Safeguarding relationships with FWs and with KWTRP. Similar views to those within household relations were raised with regards to research, KWTRP and FWs. Participants knew that health care provided in KWTRP studies was prompt and of 'high quality' and wanted to continue accessing it. Some participants also perceived KWTRP to have great influence on the general provision of health care in public health facilities, despite reassurances to the contrary. As a well-resourced powerful research institution in a relatively poor community, some participants found it difficult to decline research participation given concerns about offending individual FWs and KWTRP, and used silent refusals to respectfully avoid participation because of fears that lack of cooperation would affect access to health care: ". . .one knows KEMRI has a branch here (at the dispensary). So they fear that 'if I say I don't want KEMRI here. . .if my child or I become sick and I go there (at the dispensary) and I had refused KEMRI (research), then I may be denied services'" (FW2_male_FGD10). Silent refusals were also described as a strategy to delay decision-making in situations where participants were unsure of the implications of their choices, or where they wanted to further investigate the credibility of study information given; for example, by waiting to see if participants developed side effects. They worried that openly requesting for additional time to make decisions might be considered impolite or as a refusal:
"You see, silent refusal usually happened because someone sees like you have become a member of that family; you have become part of them. So, they start to blame themselves because you have that uhusiano (good relationship) between you and her. So she feels if she tells you openly that. . .'from now or from today I withdraw'. . .she feels guilty that 'this person has been like my child, has been like my grandchild, or has been like my uncle or has been like a brother, so when now I withdraw its like I will be chasing them away. . . So that is why you see them not showing the signs of wanting to withdraw" (FW1_male_FGD06).
For FWs who come from the community where the studies were conducted, positive relationships with participants were consolidated over the course of the studies, with FWs becoming considered part of families in many households [31] . Being employed in KWTRP gave FWs recognition and high status in the community. In addition there may have been an expectation for mutual reciprocity between FWs and participants; that is, that FWs would help community members through enrolling them in studies and ensuring access to study benefits; in turn the community members would participate in research. Therefore, participants may not have wanted to offend FWs by declining participation, instead using silent refusals tactfully.
"Somebody like me, I'm respected in the community. So, somebody coming to me and telling me that I don't want that (study) is hard. So he takes you round, like the saying 'the one who chases you doesn't tell you go away', so its upon you to understand that. . . because she respects, she can't tell you no" (FW5_male_FGD10).
Silent refusals may also have been a strategy to avoid participation in studies participants had not intended to join initially but had done so under perceived pressure from peers, friends and community leaders. Rumours about KEMRI generally, and research in particular-especially blood sampling-may have contributed to this form of silent refusal.
Study-related concerns: not wanting to lose study benefits. Study benefits formed one of the most common reasons for joining and remaining in studies, as we have described in a separate paper [39] . Fear of losing study benefits may have contributed to reluctance to refuse or withdraw from studies. In this case, silent refusals seemed to be used to mask active participation within households, as a form of 'silent participation', when some household members wanted to access or continue accessing benefits in the absence of permission from recognised decision-makers. In this case, they 'covertly' consented to participate when key dissenting adults were absent. They hoped that over time, the dissenters' fears would ease, allowing them to participate openly. The extent to which FWs were aware of this, and might even have encouraged it, was difficult to know. That it happened, albeit in few cases, is a point of concern for consent processes.
"Maybe the vehicle goes to pick her. . .when the father is around, he refuses the mother from going to the dispensary. But when the husband is not around. . . she comes to the dispensary" (Pax9_male_FGD13).
FWs were aware that study benefits filled a livelihood need especially for the extremely poor households; allowing silent refusals to remain in the study was one way of helping such families. The flipside for FWs was that accommodating silent refusals was likely to encourage other participants to behave similarly. This could potentially affect the quality of the research data collected.
Study team handling of silent refusals.. Protocols in both case studies stated that participants should be followed up to a maximum of three times, after which he/she is considered a refusal and dropped from the study. The Malaria-study protocol also stated that follow-up visits are made to withdrawers to know the reasons, to provide important information should the vaccine eventually be licensed. Consent forms clearly stated that participation is voluntary and that a participant can withdraw at any time without censure, and would continue receiving health care services normally. Each study also required a minimum number of participants to be scientifically valid, allowing for dropouts and withdrawals.
When faced with silent refusals, FWs and researchers initially followed study protocols and dropped participants from the study. However, they worried that high levels of refusals would affect the eventual validity of the study, particularly for the RSV-study where NFS was unfamiliar and majority of the participants initially declined to have it taken. FWs responded by spending extra time with participants to reassure them, giving opportunities for extended discussion to address concerns and clarify information. This contributed to generally positive relations between FWs and participants, and to building of trust as we describe elsewhere [31] . The positive relationships developed between participants and FWs, and the mutual benefits of working with silent refusals-as described above-safeguarded against hasty decisions. In the RSVstudy, over time the team accepted some silent refusals as 'permanent' within a participating household if an individual repeatedly 'not available' had minimal contact with an index child.
". . .we accommodated those who rarely get in to contact with the infant. . .whenever we did our home visits, we would collect data on their illness history. . .I would say they were not actually refusals of study participation, it's refusals to be swabbed [taken the NFS] period; but they were happy to be in the study. . .", (R1_male_IDI04).
Participants' views on how study teams should handle silent refusals. Both men and women participants in the case studies suggested that FWs should find out underlying reasons for silent refusals and find ways to resolve them. This included providing more information and addressing misunderstandings about the study and KWTRP's work. Only one participant suggested that those reluctant to participate in research should be withdrawn from the study. ". . .every time I fail to get the mother at home [because she dodges], then I will want to know the reason, whether she is willing to participate or not" (Pax9_ female_FGD12).
The strategies suggested for addressing silent refusals differed between men and women participants, related to the gendered nature of household decision-making in this community [43] . Many women felt that community leaders such as village elders and chiefs should arbitrate between FWs and silent refusals, men saw such arbitration as challenging their decisionmaking authority:
"In their misunderstanding they think if they go to the village elder they have been sued [challenged] for a mistake they have done. Instead of them knowing that they are being assisted with their children getting treatment they think they are going to be arrested. So these advices we are getting here, if he is called by the village elder he will think he's been sued. . .," (Pax1_male_FGD15).
Those suggesting arbitration appeared to base it on wanting to support participants' access to high quality free health care, arguably a misunderstanding on what research is and how it differs with treatment; and the place for personal choice in research.
FWs and researchers saw an importance in understanding the reasons behind silent refusals in order to address these. Some FWs felt frustrated when they encountered silent refusals, being confused as to whether repeated follow-up visits would be a nuisance, and concerned about the increased workload. The genuine nature of reasons given made it difficult to strictly adhere to the rule of a maximum of three follow-up visits. In addition, FWs worried that failing to give participants enough time to make decisions could lead to tensions between themselves and participants. In a few instances, FWs felt that their Principal Investigator (PIs) did not understand these dynamics well enough, instead tending to blame FWs for causing a rift with participants, leading to silent refusals.
". . . so that is the problem for us (FWs) . . .it's better if you didn't consent the person in the study but . . . she is in the study . . . she has gotten one dose (of vaccine); its better if that person had relocated to another area, there would be no problem. But you know she is there (at home) and she doesn't want to tell you (why she is reluctant) and then when you reach here (office) there is pressure you are being asked, 'what have you done to this child? What have you done to the mother until she now wants to withdraw from the study?'" (FW1_male_FGD10).
Participants were aware that silent refusal posed particular challenges for FWs, and that the complex nature of underlying reasons and the fact it is not an openly expressed choice made it difficult for FWs to know how to response appropriately [39] . The dilemma for FWs with silent refusals was whether to accept it as a refusal and drop participants from the study or retain them. Dropping participants risked annoying some, adversely impacting relationships between them and the FW [31] and creating difficulties where FWs were continuing to visit other participants in the same and neighbouring household. Dropping participants also meant they could no longer access study benefits, an issue FWs struggled with especially for the poorest households [39] . In addition, over time participants appeared to get used to 'unpopular' study procedures, so that a FW deciding to drop a participant might later be blamed by that participant for taking such action, as narrated by a FW.
. . ..you see silent refusal usually happened because someone sees like you have become a member of that family. . .so he/she feels if they tell you openly from now or from today I withdraw there may be a problem. . .because the family will not qualify to continue to be in the study, (FW1_male_FGD6) Finally, as FWs live and are embedded within communities beyond the study period, they were understandably careful that transient research activities should not spoil already established long-term relationships [31] . With regards to the science of the study, by retaining silent refusals FWs feared they might collect low quality data, requiring repeated explanation to PIs. Whichever course of action FWs took, there were likely to be strained relationships, even if temporarily, between the FWs, participants and researchers.
This study showed the socially embedded processes of consent processes for community-based studies in a long-term well-resourced research centre operating in a relatively poor, largely patriarchal community on the Kenyan Coast. In particular, we have described situations in which research consent decisions are not stated with an outright yes or no response. The findings highlight that negotiations were taking place throughout the course of the research; within households, between participants and FWs, and with others. While consent is one of the most widely described areas in research ethics, there is surprisingly little detailed research on the nature of these negotiations, and on how negotiations occur in research consent decisions. This paper further highlights that while ethical principles such as respect for persons and autonomy maybe universal, the way these are interpreted and negotiated can be context-specific, with implications for how individual agency is exercised. Given the paucity of literature on silent refusals in research conduct, there is need for empirical research in this area and across different research types and settings.
In focusing on research decision negotiations, and on silent refusals as a complex set of strategies within those negotiations, this study has illustrated that consent decisions are made in the lived social world of participants; with decisions not only about weighing up research importance, risks and benefits, but also about safeguarding important relations with significant others and researchers. In this context silent refusals emerged as a strategy used to, among others, maintain harmonious relationships within household and with FWs, to negotiate participants' favourable participation levels while accessing full study benefits. In other papers, we have described the centrality of social relations [31] , study benefits [39] and of gender roles and household dynamics (in preparation) in shaping research participation in community-bases studies in our setting. In this paper we focus on silent refusals in the context of complex and unequal power relations during research conduct.
Silent refusals highlight the interweaving of power relationships into research processes. They highlight agency and the ways in which normative power relations can be challenged and overturned; wives making decisions about areas they would otherwise not be expected to control; and participants, to some extent, determining how to participate in research. VeneKlasen and Miller, cited in [44] , describe power as ". . .both dynamic and multi-dimensional, changing according to context, circumstances and interests. Its' expressions can range from domination and resistance to collaboration and transformation" (p3). Long's description of agency power appears to be reflected in the concept of silent refusal.
" [Power] is the outcome of complex struggles and negotiation over authority, status, reputations and resources . . . such struggles are founded upon [the] extent to which specific actors perceived themselves capable of manoeuvring within particular situations and developing strategies for doing so" [45] p2.
Thus power can be exerted both overtly such as directly influencing actions and choices of others, and/or covertly such as subtle strategies that can influence the dynamics of negotiations [46] . In this study, silent refusals illustrate complex power relations within households, and between FW and households.
Authoritative power, or power over others, [44] in households was largely described as held by male household heads over other household members, from elders to younger members, and from older women (such as first wives) to younger female (and male) household members. This form of power appeared to work in practice in some households, and on certain occasions, but not in others. Thus, some female household members and minors appeared to challenge male dominance in situations where they felt their choices mattered, particularly where research decisions and participation was likely to affect their roles in the household. Kandiyoti's (1988) concept of bargaining with patriarchy appropriately frames some of the strategies women and minors used to resist male dominance in some aspects of the research [47] . Because of the covert nature of silent refusal (unexpressed refusal), those with authoritative power such as husbands, household heads and male household members expressed helplessness when they encountered it. The phenomenon of silent refusal suggests that, at least in the Kilifi setting, participants' choices about research participation are influenced by the way the research is likely to shape relationships with significant others in the household. It was used to circumvent unpopular research decisions, and to manoeuvre personal preferences into decision-making processes, while also maintaining harmony in key relationships. Strategies for negotiating favourable decisions in unequal power relations within households have been documented in household treatment seeking behaviours for seriously ill children ( [43] ; however there relatively little information with regards to research participation.
With regards to power in participant-FW relations, generally it seemed that FWs were respected in the community due to their being employed in a reputable organisation (KWTRP) and having access to resources, technical knowledge, information about the study and access to the PIs. Participants thus conceptualised FWs as community gatekeepers and expected them to put community interests over and above those of KWTRP and of research. FWs were likely to be aware of these expectations, and may have encouraged them to achieve their own goals such as attaining high recognition and meeting recruitment targets, as documented elsewhere [48] . FWs were also aware that entering people's homes put them in positions of vulnerability, since household members had control over if and how the FWs would be received. FWs thus used discretionary power [44] during research implementation to shape research conduct, and to influence perceptions of community members and PIs about them, and about the study. Thus, overall, one would expect FWs to have power over participants in their interactions.
Participants in the case studies were aware that it was important for them to follow study procedures consistently for the research to be successful. This was discussed in various forums including in community engagement meetings, during consent processes and at follow-up visits. They also knew that FWs' job performance might largely depend on their participating faithfully in the research. It, therefore, seems that participants had latent power [46] to influence research conduct, through their ability to determine whether the study would take place (and in what form), and whether FWs would be welcomed to their homes for follow-up visits. They exercised these powers in various ways; overtly through continuous discussions; and covertly particularly through silent refusals. Together, these factors contributed to participants' perceptions and understanding of their tacit power to control the direction of study implementation, while maintaining harmony in key relationships. We call this subtle power as it was not explicitly expressed and appeared scattered and fragmented across different participants and over time. The relational nature of this form of power made it difficult to detect in the first instance, and was frustrating to those who experienced it, especially the FWs. The practice of silent refusal showed that to some extent participants could exert agency in their participation levels (choosing what study procedures to participate in, when and how), and the overall research implementation. Exploring factors underpinning silent refusals shows an intricate interplay between multiple sources of power amongst participants and FWs that shaped decisions about research participation.
Many of the findings serve to highlight the disconnect between universalist ethics approaches and individual/contextualised responses to medical research. This tension is constantly faced by FWs in their daily roles, as something they have to constantly negotiate although it is rarely acknowledged. There is now a growing body of literature that is drawing attention to the ethical challenges and dilemmas that fieldworkers face in undertaking their research roles in developing countries [25, 26, 32, 49] ; this paper adds to this body of literature by describing an area that has not been written about, silent refusals and subtle power negotiations in research participation.
While many communities exhibit some form of silent refusal, very little has been written about it with regards to research participation. Silent refusals illustrate the complexities inherent in negotiating decisions around research participation and the ongoing nature of informed consent processes. They illuminate the socially embedded nature of research participation, and the significance of taking account of the social worlds of participants and the ways in which agency is exercised to shape research implementation in otherwise unequal power relations. Exercising such agency calls us to take account of both individualism and the relational nature of those involved in research, and the sometimes conflicting ways these two play out; such as women subtly exercising their power to make decisions in areas they otherwise would not be involved in, but doing so in ways that avoid conflicts within and beyond the household. Recognising the centrality of negotiations for research participation is one way to take account of power relations embedded in such processes, and to start to unpack and understand the ethical issues around consent as a process. In this research, we support the call to consider consent as a process for community-based studies. We propose that this requires understanding the nature of consultations and negotiations that go on, and unpacking of ethical issues interwoven in such processes. Those involved in undertaking consent, often fieldworkers who are embedded in communities, play a critical interface role and mediate between researchers and the community; one which brings multiple dilemmas and challenges. The complexity of power relationships between participants and FWs is echoed in those between FWs and PIs. PIs need to be aware of the ethically charged, complex and fluid environments that FWs encounter in their daily work. Guidelines are unlikely to be adequate for all situations that FWs encounter, and PIs who are more removed from the messy realities of community-embedded consent processes will find it difficult to understand the issues. Providing constructive supportive supervision where there is 'space' for fieldworkers to air and discuss their own embedded knowledge and concerns-as much as possible throughout the entire research cycle-will be important, as will ensuring that FWs are trained in research ethics, communication skills, and how to recognise and respond to ethical dilemmas they may encounter.
Western societies are facing increasing reports of stress-related sickness among otherwise healthy and high-performing persons who report that they have not experienced any major negative life events or particular stress in early life [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] . These persons describe having stereotyped symptoms, including memory and concentration problems, sleeplessness, diffuse aches, profound fatigue, irritability, anxiety, and a feeling of being emotionally drained, which they often attribute to occupational stress. It has also been found that such stressed individuals can experience an acute phase with symptoms of hypertension, chest pain, dizziness and serious cognitive disabilities [6] . Even though many individuals recover from the acute symptoms, the cognitive and emotional dysfunction as well as the increased sensitivity to stress often last for months, or years, forcing the affected individuals to work part-time, change jobs or retire early. Many professionals are still not accepting the described disabilities as a medical condition, and when accepted, they tend to be misdiagnosed as depression. Only a minor portion of the affected individuals are helped by treatment with serotonin reuptake inhibitors or other antidepressants [7] . The major pathways of the physiological response to stress involve autonomic nervous system as well as hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis [8] . Although subjects suffering from symptoms attributed to chronic occupational stress are believed to have an altered reactivity of the HPA system, it is unknown whether this is a consistent finding [9] , and both normal [10, 11] , reduced [12, 13, 14, 15] , and elevated [16, 17, 18] cortisol levels after awakening have been reported. Furthermore, in contrast to patients with major depression [19] , subjects with chronic occupational stress symptoms show reduced cortisol and ACTH responses to the Corticotropin Releasing Hormone after dexametasone pretreatment [5, 20] . Emotional reactions to chronic stress and major depression, thus, seem to represent at least partly separate constructs, even if some symptoms (such as anxiety and attention and memory deficits) may overlap.
In a recent PET study, we found that patients suffering from chronic work-related psychosocial stress had significant reductions in the 5-HT 1A receptor binding in three limbic structures: the hippocampus, the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and the anterior insular cortex [21] . A functional disconnection was also found between the amygdala, the ACC, and the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), despite the absence of psychiatric co-morbidity and major negative life events [21] . The locations of changes, in several aspects, corresponded to the locations of structural changes detected through MRI in persons suffering from other stressrelated conditions, such as stress in early life, repeated stressful negative life events, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29] .
This similarity raises the question of whether certain changes in structural volumes also occur among persons with symptoms related to chronic work-related stress. This is of interest for a couple reasons. Firstly, since the pathophysiology of symptoms attributed to occupational stress is highly debated, there is a need for clarification on whether this condition is associated with any cerebral changes. Secondly, if structural changes similar to those described in other stress-related conditions are also linked to occupational stress, one may hypothesize that chronic psychosocial stress affects our brains in a rather stereotyped manner, regardless of the underlying cause, and that cerebral changes are not limited to exposure to extreme and life threatening situations, but can also be related to accumulated everyday stress.
We therefore carried out comparative MRI studies of cerebral gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM) volumes between patients with chronic occupation-related stress and healthy controls. The study also included an analysis of the structural volumes of the hippocampus, caudate, and putamen. The two latter regions, to the best of our knowledge, have not been previously investigated in this population. They were, however, of interest because they have been shown to process stress stimuli [30, 31, 32, 33] Furthermore, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of a large sample of adults with no history of psychopathology revealed that people who have experienced significant early life stress have volumetric reductions in the caudate nucleus in addition to the anterior cingulate cortex [24] . Also, a recent study of effects of life traumas during youth, reveal reductions in the caudate and putamen volumes [34] , further emphasizing that volume changes in these structures may be related to stress. On the basis of these previous data, and assuming that a repetitive stressinduced activation could lead to neuronal and dendritic damage in the structures involved, it was hypothesized that the caudate and putamen volumes may be smaller in persons suffering from prolonged occupational stress than in controls. Given previous findings on the effects of stress on the brain [5, 6, 21, 35] , a further hypothesis was that our stressed subjects would have reductions in the GM and WM volumes in the ACC and mPFC, and in the grey matter volumes of the hippocampus, amygdala and the insular cortex. These hypotheses were tested in a magnetic resonance (MR) study, which combined two different analyses -voxel based morphometry (VBM) and structural volumetry. VBM was carried out in two ways: 1) exploratively, with the entire brain as search space, to investigate whether there were any regional GM and WM changes in the brain on pixel by pixel basis. 2) It was also used with the assumption that GM and WM would be changed in regions known to be consistently involved in the regulation of stress (such as the hippocampus, mesial prefrontal cortex, insular cortex and the amygdala), and therefore, restricting the search space to a mask covering these areas (see methods). Structural volumetry was carried out in addition to the VBM analyses because some subcortical structures, basal ganglia in particular, have a poor white and gray matter demarcation, and the volumes of these structures are better defined with manual delineation.

Thirty right-handed [36] , non-smoking patients (23 women and 7 men, age 41.366.6, range 36-55 years, education 13.562 years), who had been diagnosed as having had a 'reaction to severe stress and an adjustment disorder' according to the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10, F43), were recruited from the Stress Research Institute at Stockholm University. In order to compose a study group with a homogenous etiology and to reduce variability, the selection was limited to subjects who attributed their illness to prolonged work-related stress, after working 60 to 70 hours per week continuously over several years prior to the onset of symptoms. Inclusion criteria consisted of a characteristic symptom course of sleeplessness, diffuse aches, palpitations and fatigue, a subsequent onset of irritability, anxiety, memory and concentration problems, feeling of depersonalization, and reduced work capacity (confirmed by the employers) [5, 6] . All of the subjects attributed their symptoms to chronic stress and had no other known etiology for their distress.
Subjects were also required to have had a symptom duration of at least one year, to have been on sick leave ($50%) for stressrelated symptoms for a minimum of 6 months before entering the study, and to have an average stress-burnout score of $3.0 on the Maslach Stress-Burnout Inventory -General Survey (MBI-GS), [37] . This 7-point rating scale, ranging from 0 (never) to 6 (daily), consists of three subscales: exhaustion (five items), cynicism (five items), and lack of professional efficacy (six items). When rating perceived stress, subjects were asked to take into consideration the last six months, and not only the actual time-point. The average scores for Scandinavian populations are around 2 for MBI-GS, [1, 38] .
Subjects were excluded if they had previous history of psychosis, personality disorder, major or bipolar depression, alcohol or substance abuse, chronic fatigue, chronic pain, fibromyalgia, or neurological or endocrine disease. Subjects, who had experienced prominent stress factors in their private life or a major traumatic event at any time in their life, including sexual abuse, were also excluded. No daily medication was allowed during the two months prior to the study, except contraceptives. Review of past history of pharmacological treatment revealed no drugs known to affect brain structure (for example, psychopharmaca).
Sixty-eight healthy, right-handed, non-smoking volunteers (53 females and 15 males, age 37.567.2 years, range 27-51 years, education 13.062.35 years) with no history of chronic stress or heredity for neuropsychiatric disorders were used as the control group. The patient and control groups therefore had similar gender distributions, and both groups had a female dominance to accommodate with the female-dominated epidemiology of the condition studied [1] . The study was approved by the Ethics Committee at the Karolinska Institute, and written informed consent was received from each participant.
Before the interview, participants completed questionnaires in order to evaluate their stress symptoms and assess their previous life events. In addition, the occurrence of major life events among the subjects was assessed through a clinical psychiatric interview based on the non-work-related items of the Holmes and Rahe Scale [39] . The participants were asked to answer yes or no to whether they had experienced any non-work-related stressful life events (e.g., death of a relative or spouse, recent divorce, forced family relocation). Subjects were excluded if they answered positively to having experienced such an event in their lives. Patients also received a medical screening, (physical examination, test of thyroid and liver function). The possible presence of psychiatric disorders or personality disturbances were assessed according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association, 4th Edition (DSM-IV), including the Structured Questionnaire for DSM-IVH Axis I and II (Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IVH (SCID-I, and II) (American Psychiatric Publishing Inc, Arlington, 1997), along with a test for depression using the Montgomery-Asberg Depression scale [40] .
Data acquisition. All magnetic resonance imaging data was acquired on a whole-body 1.5-Tesla MRI medical scanner (General Electric, Milwaukee, Wisconsin) equipped with an 8-channel phased array coil. The MRI protocol included the following scans: 1) 3D-weighted T1 SPGR images with 1 mm isotropic voxel size according to a previously described protocol [41] ; and 2) 2D T2-weighted fast spin echo (FSE) images in the axial plane (effective TE = 56 ms, TR = 2500 ms, FOV = 24 cm, 23 slices of 3 mm thickness). The 2D images were not used in the present analysis.
Voxel-Based Morphometry (VBM). We used a version of the VBM in the SPM5 package (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) with the Gaser toolbox (http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm/) and voxel values in the segmented images were modulated (multiplied) by the Jacobian determinants derived from the spatial normalization step. The analyses of modulated data allowed direct comparisons of regional differences in the amount of each tissue type.
After pre-processing, visually checking for homogeneity across the sample, smoothed (8 mm), modulated, and normalized images were obtained and used for the statistical analyses. These modulated volume images of the respective tissue types are hereafter referred to as GM, WM, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Structural volumetry. In regions with poor white and gray matter demarcation, as in basal ganglia, volumetry is regarded as more reliable than VBM analysis [43] , and manual volumetry was, therefore, used in addition to VBM. Homologous VOIs were delineated manually for the hippocampus, caudate, and putamen in all the subjects.
All the volumes were delineated on original, un-reformatted T1 images using MRIcro software (www.sph.sc.edu/comd/rorden/ mricro.html) by two investigators who were uninformed about the identity of the subjects. Values presented in Results and Table 1b were generated by investigator 1, who analyzed all the data (investigator 2 analyzed structural volumes from 15 randomized subjects in each study group). Both raters analyzed 10 images twice to establish the intra-rater reliability. VOIs were outlined according to previously described protocols [43, 44, 45] . In summary.
The hippocampus: the hippocampus was traced according to the protocol of Watson et al. [46] . The posterior boundary of the hippocampus was defined as the first image in which the crus of the fornix became visible. The superior boundary consisted of the alveus; the lateral boundary was the inferior corn of the lateral ventricle; the ambient cistern was the medial boundary, whereas the WM of the parahippocampal gyrus represented the inferior boundary. The hippocampus VOI included the tail of the hippocampus.
The caudate nucleus: the caudate nuclei were traced separately, in accordance with Raz et al. [47] . The lateral ventricle was used as the medial boundary; the subcallosal fasciculus served as the anterior boundary; the stria terminalis was the posterior boundary (identified by a change in signal intensity relative to the caudate nucleus); and the anterior limb of the internal capsule served as the lateral boundary. The region of interest included the head, the body of the caudate, and the tail (excluding the portion that turned anterior). The nucleus accumbens was excluded as well.
The putamen: the delineation of the putamen started in the first slice where it became visible laterally to the caudate. The superior boundary was defined by the corona radiata, the internal capsule was the medial border, and the lateral border was the external capsule. The posterior limit was the point at which the putamen was no longer visible in the corona radiata. The lower limit was just above the amygdala, excluding nucleus accumbens, when the operator could see the most inferior aspect of the third ventricle and the chiasmatic cistern was no longer visible.
The hippocampus was delineated on coronal images, and the other structures on horizontal sections. All the volumes were then viewed and corrected on coronal, horizontal, as well as sagital images.
Group differences in age and education, as well as differences in the total intracranial volume (TIV), calculated as the total volume of GM + WM + CSF, and the total tissue volume (TV), calculated as the total volume of GM + WM, were tested with unpaired Students t-test (p,0.05). Group comparisons of the total GM and WM volumes were tested using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA, p,0.05), taking into consideration individual differences in TIV, which was used as the covariate in addition to age and sex (the latter was not strictly necessary as the groups were matched for sex). Group comparisons of relative structural volumes (VOI/TIV) were carried out with unpaired Students t-tests using the mean individual relative values of the two homologous VOIs for each type of structure as input values (p,0.016), after Bonferroni correction for the three separate regions). The aforementioned analyses were carried out with PASW Statistics 18 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL).
Group differences in GM and WM volumes within the regions that were expected to show changes in stressed subjects (the ACC and mPFC, the hippocampus, amygdala and the insular cortex) were tested with VBM by restricting the search space to a mask encompassing the amygdalae (both sides), hippocampi, the ACC, the medial and superior frontal gyrus, and the insular cortex (both sides). This mask was derived using the WFU Pick Atlas (maldjian@wfubmc.edu), by adding the respective regional areas as defined by the atlas into a confluent, large mask (Fig. 1) . In addition, we employed explorative analysis using also the entire brain as the search space to investigate possible differences between the two subject groups in other regions. Significant clusters were defined with flexible factorial design in SPM5 (voxel threshold p,0.001, with FDR correction at p,0.05) using age, sex, and the total brain volume (TIV) as covariates of no interest. We also implemented non-stationary cluster extent correction in the Gaser toolbox to correct for the non-uniform smoothness in the VBM images. The co-ordinates are reported in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space.
We hypothesized that changes in regional GM and WM, and in the structural volumes would be related to the degree of perceived stress. To test this, correlation analyses were carried out between MBI-GS scores and the individual GM or WM volumes extracted from the clusters showing significant group differences in GM and WM volumes as well as the relative volumes (the VOI/TIV ratios) of structures showing a significant difference between patients and controls. For the correlation analyses between VOI/TIV and MBI-GS, we used the mean of the two homologous regions (provided that a possible difference from controls was bilateral) in order to reduce the number of comparisons. The significance value for these linear regressions was set at p,0.05, because each of the regions included in this calculation was assumed to be affected by stress.
Inter-and intra-rater reliability was tested with linear correlation analysis, Pearson's coefficient, p,0.05.

The groups did not differ in age or education. (Table 1) . No significant difference was detected between the two subject groups in respect to depression, as assessed by MADRAS scores (p = 0.12), although the mean value was higher among patients (Table 1) . However, the MBI-GS scores, indicating perceived work-related stress levels, were significantly higher among the patients (4.261.1 vs. 2.260.5; p,0.0001; F = 100.6, df = 1); among controls, the scores were below 3.0 and in the range reported in other studies [1, 38] , (Table 1) .
No gross anatomical abnormalities were found, as judged by an experienced neuroradiologist, and none of the subjects had to be excluded due to either movement artifacts during scanning or segmentation errors.
We did not detect any group difference regarding total GM volume, WM volume, total TV, or the TIV (Table 2) .
Patients showed a significantly lower structural volume relative to the TIV (VOI/TIV) bilaterally in the caudate and putamen ( Table 2) . The results remained when adding age and MADRAS as covariate (p,0.001 for both structures, post hoc analysis with ANCOVA). No significant group difference was detected in the volume of the hippocampus. The inter-rater correlation was 0.8 for the measurements of the hippocampus, and 0.9 for the caudate and putamen; the corresponding intra-rater values were 0.8, 1.0, respectively.
Significant reductions in the GM volumes were detected in three clusters among the patients. They were located in the ACC (a region covered by the a priori hypothesis), and, in addition, in the left and right middle frontal gyrus (regions constituting portions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex -dlPFC), (Table 3 , Fig. 2 ). Contrary to the hypothesis, we found no changes in the hippocampus, the amygdala, or the anterior insular cortex, (Table 3) . No regional increases in GM were found in among patients. No group differences were detected in regional WM.
Post hoc group comparison when adding MADRAS as covariate of no interest did not alter the results.
No correlations were detected between stress scores (MBI-GS) and the individual GM volumes extracted from the clusters showing significant differences between controls and patients (the ACC, the left and right middle frontal gyrus). There was, however, a statistically significant, negative correlation between the relative structural volume of the caudate and putamen (mean of the right and left values for the respective structure) and the MBI-GS scores (r = 20.47 and p = 0.0001, r = 20.45 p = 0.0001, respectively), Fig. 3A . When estimating the regression lines separately for stressed subjects and controls, significant inverse correlations remained amongst the controls for both structures (r = 20.57, and r = 20.45; p,0.0001 for both), Fig. 3B , whereas amongst the stressed group there was only a tendency for an inverse correlation in the caudate (r = 20.36, p = 0.054), and no correlation with the relative volume of the putamen (Fig. 3C) .
The present study tests the hypothesis that perceived prolonged occupational stress is associated with regional morphological changes in the brain. Such changes have been found in patients with PTSD (thus, in relation to life threatening trauma), in persons having experienced early life traumas, and in those reporting negative major life events [23, 27] . However, to the best of our knowledge, the possibility of such changes has not been previously discussed in relation to subjects undergoing occupational stress who have not faced extreme life conditions or psychosocial trauma and who have no history of psychiatric disorders.
The principal findings were the reductions in the GM volumes of the ACC and the dlPFC, and reductions in the volumes of the caudate and putamen. The basal ganglia volumes were also inversely correlated with the degree of perceived stress. All the structures in which we detected changes have been described to be sensitive to stress stimuli [21, 23, 48, 49] and are known to be involved in stress physiology [31, 33, 50, 51] . Decreased GM volume and density in the prefrontal cortex and the ACC in particular has been detected in several studies of persons suffering from PTSD [26, 27, 52, 53, 54] . Of particular interest is the data of Kasai et al., showing atrophy of the ACC, hippocampus and insular cortex in combat veterans with PTSD but not in their identical twins, suggesting that the detected abnormality was acquired [26] . Furthermore, measurements of cortical thickness in a separate group of patients with PTSD have shown dynamic, stress-related changes in the dlPFC which were characterized by an increase in cortical thickness that gradually normalized over time during recovery [55] .
Data from studies on basal ganglia in corresponding populations are less abundant. There are reports about an affection of the caudate and putamen in relation to early life traumas [56] and PTSD, [57] , but in general, these structures have received relatively minor interest in the context of stress. The present finding of reduced structural volumes in the caudate and putamen, therefore, deserves particular consideration. This finding is in accordance with the reported activations of the basal ganglia occurring during acute stress [31, 58, 59] . It is also compatible with the notion that both the putamen and caudate receive powerful glutamatergic input from the prefrontal cortex [60] and are susceptible to excitotoxicity [61, 62] . The present findings are also congruent with the well-known phenomenon of stress-related freezing [63] and raises the question of whether and how motor performance may be affected in persons suffering from chronic psychosocial stress.
The regions showing changes in our stressed patients are part of a network believed to mediate the integration of cognitive, affective, and autonomic responses [64] .
It is tenable that an affection of these structures could lead to poor attention, and working memory deficits, symptoms which individuals with chronic occupational stress have described experiencing [5, 6, 65] . The preset data is in line with results from a fMRI study by Sandström et al., showing a decreased activation of the dlPFC among 10 patients suffering from occupational stress [6] , and with a fMRI study by Qin et al., which detected a reduced activation of the dlPFC in healthy subjects who performed a working memory task under acute stress [51] .
Contrary to our hypothesis, but in accordance with the presently available reports from MRI studies of subjects with occupational stress [5, 21] , no changes were detected in the hippocampus or amygdala. Among studies of other chronic stress conditions, relatively few have examined amygdala volumes, and Figure 2 . Reductions in GM volumes in stressed subjects. Significant reductions in the GM (red) in stressed subjects compared with controls. Clusters calculated using peak threshold at p = 0.001, FDR corrected at p,0.05. All the clusters are superimposed on the GM template from the entire study group. The numbers indicate z-levels in MNI co-ordinates. R = right side. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0064065.g002 # Cluster showing a significant group difference when using a limbic mask comprising the anterior cingulate cortex, the mPFC, the insular cortex, the hippocampus and the amygdala, using peak threshold at p = 0.001, FDR corrected at p,0.05. The other clusters were calculated with same level of significance, but using the entire brain as search space (no a priori hypothesis). No group differences were observed in white matter volumes and no significant clusters were detected when reversing the contrast (using the contrast: stressed patients -controls). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0064065.t003
the results are variable. Among persons with PTSD, smaller volumes have been reported in some studies [66, 67] , while others have detected normal values [68, 69, 70] . Similar inconsistency appears with regard to the hippocampus [5, 69, 71] . One possible explanation for the mixed findings could be that the small size of these structures, the amygdala in particular, may lead to greater variability in volume measures, which hampers the probability of detecting significant group differences, especially when the investigated study groups are undersized. Given the size of the present population and the use of 1.5 Tesla scanner, we did not try to specifically assess the structural volume of the amygdala in the present study. Another potential explanation may be associated with time of the stress exposure in relation to age as such exposure may have effects on these structures under sensitive developmental periods [72, 73] .
The fact that the presently detected volume reductions were confined to regions believed to be involved in the processing of stress stimuli [23] makes it highly unlikely that they were random findings. The threshold used in the SPM analysis was in accordance with other VBM studies of psychosocial stress in humans [27, 74, 75] and the detected differences in the structural volumes of the caudate and putamen were highly significant.
At present, we can only speculate about the underpinnings of the observed changes. Because the study was cross-sectional, it is difficult to state whether the detected reductions represent the neurotoxic effect of stress, effect of other factors, such as nitric oxide, or are associated with a pre-existing condition that could have rendered the brain more vulnerable to the development of pathological stress responses. Due to our strict selection criteria, it is, however, possible to exclude potential confounding factors such as major life traumas, psychiatric premorbidity, depression, chronic pain, and pharmacological treatment. Considering the congruence with data from animal experiments as well as with the longitudinal data from patients with PTSD, we find it probable that the present findings reflect effects of chronic psychosocial stress, in this case, occupational stress. The observed inverse correlation between the stress scores and the relative volumes of the caudate and putamen (Fig. 3) could be taken as an argument for this view. It should be notified, however, that this correlation is dominated by the data from controls (r = 20.57, p = 0,0001, and r = 20.45, p = 0.0001, whereas the corresponding regression line in stressed subjects only showed a non-significant trend for the caudate (r = 20.36 p = 0.054), and no trend for the putamen (r = 20.08; p = 0.69). The reason for that is not evident, one possibility could be that the control group was much larger, and that the spread of volumes was larger among the controls. Worth mentioning is that in our recent follow up investigation of two new cohorts of controls and subjects with occupational stress, shows very similar results (Osika&Savic, manuscript in preparation).
The molecular underpinnings of the morphological changes after stress are just beginning to be studied in detail, please see Leuner and Shors 2012, and Conrad 2008, for a comprehensive review [76, 77] . The major mediators of stress-related neuronal modulation involving dendritic retraction and in some cases neurotoxicity are glucocorticoids and glutamate [23] . They have own neuronal effects, and are also reported to interact [78, 79] . Circulating glucocorticoids interact with various neurotransmitters, [80] and chronic stress in tree shrews is found to reduce the number of dopamine transporter (DAT) binding sites (B max ) in the caudate nucleus and the putamen [81] . Adrenal ectomy is reported to increase the proliferation of hippocampal neurons whereas excess in glucocorticoid is reported to decrease it sharply, as do psychosocial stressors [82] . Experiments with betamethasone infusion in fetal sheep show glucocorticoid-related loss of synaptic density in the frontal neocortex, caudate, putamen, and hippocampus [83, 84] . While these alterations were initially viewed as a neurodegenerative event, it is worth mentioning that more recent studies suggest that stress induced dendritic alterations are reversible if animals are given time to recover from chronic stress [77] .
The second stress-associated factor, which could have contributed to the observed changes, is glutamate. Data from animal experiments show that stress causes an enhanced release of glutamate, and that a stress-related elevation of extracellular glutamate levels induces retraction in the spines in stress-targeted regions, such as the mPFC, ACC, and the basal ganglia [79, 85, 86, 87, 88] . Medial prefrontal cortex is reported to be sensitive to repetitive stress [89] . See also the review by Leuner and Shors [77] . Via glutamatergic excitation the mPFC and ACC send inhibitory GABA-ergic impulses to the amygdala, which is the primary cerebral relay for the processing of psychosocial stress stimuli [90] . One possible scenario is that the absence of prefrontal inhibition of the amygdala, due to the stress-mediated neurotoxic damage of the mPFC (due to high glutamate, cortisol or the combination of both [79, 91] , may cause amygdala hyperactivity [92] , providing a context for a vicious circle with increased excitation and excitotoxic changes along the networks linked to the amygdala and mPFC. These networks primarily include the dlPFC, the basal ganglia, and the limbic brain (the hippocampus and insular cortex). Whereas the ACC, the dlPFC, and the basal ganglia showed distinct changes, neither the hippocampus nor the insular cortex was seemingly affected according to our results, even though these regions were included in the specific search space defined by our limbic mask. This was unexpected, especially when considering that both structures had significant reductions in 5-HT 1A receptor binding potential in our previous study of a similar population [21] . The underlying reasons are not clear, and a larger population of subjects needs to be investigated before this lack of significance can be taken as an argument for specificity of the previously detected 5-HT 1A receptor changes.
Several methodological limitations deserve comment. Firstly, the sample was rather small even though the sensitivity was enhanced by the use of a homogenous study group. Secondly, causality cannot be determined in the present study, and longitudinal studies would be needed to provide a better understanding of the temporal relationships between morphological brain alterations and periods of psychosocial stress. The issue of comorbidity with depression is always a problem in a study group like our -as some symptoms are overlapping and the condition of profound fatigue and inability to lead a normal life is perceived as extremely taxing by some subjects. The stressed subjects were not deemed as depressed by the experienced psychiatrist. We also re-run the comparisons between groups using MADRAs scores as covariate in addition to age and gender when comparing the mean relative caudate and putamen values between the groups. The results remained (p = 0.0061 for caudate and p = 0.0002 for putamen). Also in the VBM analysis, when controlling for depression by entering depression scores as covariate the results remained unchanged. Finally, neuropsychological data was not collected systematically, as we whished to investigate weather there are any anatomical changes in the brain that could be related to occupational stress, before designing a study to test possible behavioural correlates. Such study is on going.
The advantage of the present study is that it combines VBM analysis and investigations of structural volumes. In regions with poor white and gray matter demarcation, as in the basal ganglia, volumetry is regarded as more reliable than VBM [43] , and the two methods should, therefore, be used in tandem. Consequently, it is not surprising that structural volumetry showed reductions in the basal ganglia while the corresponding GM and VM volumes did not differ from controls.
By investigating the GM and WM volumes and structural volumes of subjects who are experiencing chronic psychosocial stress, but do not have a history of a particular psychosocial trauma, the present study expands upon the data from animal experiments and reports from PTSD patients, and focuses on the involvement of the frontostriatal circuits in chronic stress. The finding of GM atrophy in regions known to be associated with chronic psychosocial stress confirms our previous conclusion that subjects reporting stereotyped symptoms from occupational stress have a medical condition requiring careful investigations and a targeted treatment. Larger series and consecutive investigations before and after treatments, as well as parallel mapping of cognitive and motor functions are highly encouraged in the future, and might have important implications for the understanding of this increasingly common condition.
Conclusions: ISA1307 genes homologous to S. cerevisiae genes GYP8, WSC4, PMT1, KTR7, RKR1, TIF3, ILV3 and MSN4 are proposed as strong candidate determinants of acetic acid tolerance. The ORF ZBAI_02295 that contains a functional domain associated to the uncharacterised integral membrane proteins of unknown function of the DUP family is also suggested as a relevant tolerance determinant. The genes ZbMSN4 and ZbTIF3, encoding a putative stress response transcription factor and a putative translation initiation factor, were confirmed as determinants of acetic acid tolerance in both Z. bailii and S. cerevisiae. This study provides valuable indications on the cellular components, pathways and processes to be targeted in order to control food spoilage by the highly acetic acid tolerant Z. bailii and Z. bailii-derived strains. Additionally, this information is essential to guide the improvement of yeast cells robustness against acetic acid if the objective is their use as cell factories.
Keywords: Yeast, Zygosaccharomyces bailii, Acetic acid tolerance genes, Yeast hybrid strains, Food spoilage yeasts, Weak acid food preservatives
Zygosaccharomyces bailii is considered the most problematic spoilage yeast found in the food and beverage industry, particularly in acidic foods, soft drinks, fruit juices, dairy products and salad dressings [1, 2] . This yeast species ability to cause spoilage derives from its outstanding intrinsic capacity to resist to weak acids widely used as fungistatic preservatives, such as acetic, propionic, benzoic and sorbic acids [1] [2] [3] [4] . Understanding the mechanisms of weak acid resistance is central to the development and implementation of more effective food and beverage preservation strategies in order to minimise economic losses. Although Z. bailii is the spoilage yeast that exhibits the highest level of tolerance to acetic acid, most of the scientific contributions on the mechanisms underlying adaptation and resistance to acetic acid in yeast have been focused on the more susceptible experimental model Saccharomyces cerevisiae [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] . At a pH equal or below its pKa (4.75), acetic acid is mainly in the undissociated form that can diffuse across the plasma membrane. Once in the near neutral cytosol, acetic acid dissociates leading to the accumulation of protons and acetate. The acidification of the cytosol leads to the inhibition of metabolic activity and to the dissipation of the proton gradient across plasma membrane required for secondary transport [10, 11] . To counteract this effect, the plasma membrane protonpumping ATPase (PM H + -ATPase) is activated in acetic acid-stressed S. cerevisiae cells [12] . The involvement of Z. bailii PM H + -ATPase in the active export of protons from cells challenged by weak acid preservatives, namely benzoic acid, was also demonstrated, suggesting that both yeasts share this response mechanism [13] . Given that the charged acetate counterion is not able to easily cross the hydrophobic plasma membrane lipid bilayer, it accumulates in the cell interior leading to increased oxidative stress and turgor pressure, among other effects [3, 9] . To counteract these effects, the plasma membrane multidrug resistance (MDR) transporters of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) Tpo2 and Tpo3 were hypothesized to play a role in the extrusion of acetate from acetic acid-challenged S. cerevisiae cells [5] . To date, no acetate export system was described in Z. bailii. S. cerevisiae response to acetic acid-induced stress involves several transcriptional regulators [4, 9] . The expression of the transcription factor encoding gene HAA1 was found to markedly decrease the duration of the adaptation period of a yeast cell population suddenly exposed to toxic concentrations of acetic acid, by decreasing the loss of cell viability that occurs during this phase of growth latency [5] . Haa1 is considered one of the key players in the control of S. cerevisiae response to acetic acid due to its role in the direct, or indirect, regulation of approximately 80 % of acetic acid-responsive genes [6] , several of them required for maximal tolerance to acetic acid [8] . These genes code for protein kinases, MDR transporters, transcription factors and proteins involved in lipid metabolism and nucleic acid processing [6] .
In order to identify determinants of Z. bailii tolerance to acetic acid at the genome level we used in this study a genomic library previously prepared from the highly acetic acid tolerant strain ISA1307, an interspecies hybrid between Z. bailii and a closely related species which was isolated from a continuous production plant of sparkling wine [14, 15] . This genomic library was used to rescue the high susceptibility phenotype of S. cerevisiae BY4741_haa1Δ. This mutant, deleted for HAA1 gene, was chosen due to its very high susceptibility to acetic acid to avoid the use of the much higher concentrations required to inhibit the parental strain growth. With this approach we also expected to identify the functional homologue of S. cerevisiae HAA1 gene in this hybrid strain. During the development of this study, our laboratory carried out the genome sequencing, assembly and annotation of ISA1307 [14] . This hybrid strain has been on the focus of several physiological studies, some of them aiming at the understanding of the mechanisms underlying its remarkable intrinsic resistance to acetic acid. Differently from S. cerevisiae, the Z.bailii-derived hybrid strain ISA1307 co-consumes glucose and acetic acid when cultivated in glucose medium supplemented with a sublethal growth inhibitory concentration of acetic acid [16, 17] . Quantitative proteomic studies on the adaptive response of this strain indicate that in glucose and acetic acid cultures the acid is channelled through the TCA cycle [16] . After glucose exhaustion, acetic acid being present as the sole carbon source, the content of several proteins involved in gluconeogenesis and pentose phosphate pathway was however found to increase [16] .
The screening of ISA1307 genomic library for genes required for tolerance to acetic acid successfully pointed out several strong candidates, but since this is a hybrid strain difficult to be genetically manipulated, in order to confirm the role of the selected genes in acetic acid tolerance we have explored another strain, Z. bailii IST302. This strain was isolated from spontaneous fermentation of wine must and, contrarily to ISA1307 and Z. bailii CLIB213 T [18] , does not flocculate and proved to be more susceptible to genetic engineering than these reference strains. The genome of Z. bailii IST302 was recently sequenced and annotated in our laboratory (unpublished data), rendering possible the work here reported.
The knowledge gathered during the present study was based on the expression of ISA1307 genomic library in S. cerevisiae, the availability of the genome sequences of the hybrid strain ISA1307 and Z. bailii IST302 and the expression of selected ISA1307 and IST302 gene sequences in S. cerevisiae and Z. bailii strains and led to the identification of a number of Z. bailii genes involved in tolerance to acetic acid. Strong candidates for determinants of acetic acid tolerance in Z. bailii or S. cerevisiae are here proposed.
Selection of S. cerevisiae transformants with increased tolerance to acetic acid through the expression of an ISA1307 genomic library
To search for genes involved in the remarkable tolerance to acetic acid in a Z. bailii-related strain we looked for suppressors of the susceptibility phenotype of S. cerevisiae BY4741_haa1Δ through the transformation of this strain with a previously constructed genomic library from the highly tolerant Z. bailii-derived interspecies hybrid strain ISA1307 [15] . This allowed the isolation of 1225 yeast clones, selected in a minimal medium without uracil (Fig. 1) . These yeast transformants were screened for their increased tolerance to acetic acid through growth in liquid medium in 96-well microplates. This selection methodology allowed the identification of 92 potential candidates out of the 1225 positive colonies initially obtained. Total DNA was extracted from each selected transformant and used to transform Escherichia coli XL1-Blue in order to isolate the plasmid insert of interest and to guarantee the identification of a single plasmid capable of suppressing S. cerevisiae haa1Δ susceptibility phenotype. The plasmids were extracted from E.coli transformants, purified and used to transform again the deletion mutant S. cerevisiae BY4741_haa1Δ and also the parental strain BY4741. Out of these 92 tested transformants, only 31 DNA inserts were confirmed to substantially increase the haa1Δ mutant tolerance to acetic acid and were hence sequenced. Both the parental and the deletion mutant haa1Δ cells transformed with each one of these 31 plasmids were grown in 96-well microplates with 60 mM of acetic acid supplemented medium or in control conditions in order to confirm the ability of the corresponding inserts to rescue the haa1Δ mutant susceptibility phenotype as well as their effect in the growth of the parental strain transformants (Additional file 1: Figure S1 ). Considering the haa1Δ transformants, the suppressors were able to rescue haa1Δ susceptibility phenotype by shortening the latency period by at least 20 h when compared with the haa1Δ strain transformed with the empty vector. At the concentration of acetic acid tested (60 mM, pH4.0) the protective effect of the expression of the DNA inserts in the candidate clones was not as evident for the parental strain compared with the haa1Δ mutant, since the parental strain is much less susceptible than the mutant to acetic acid. Nevertheless, a number of inserts clearly improve the tolerance of the parental strain transformed with the empty vector at the acetic acid concentration tested. Results obtained with the five best suppressors, or in other words those capable of diminishing at a greater extent the duration of the latency period of the parental or the haa1Δ strains transformed with the empty vector, are shown in Fig. 2a and b. Three of these suppressors, the inserts B02, B18 and S06, were identified by the transformation of both the parental and the haa1 deletion mutant strains.
In silico analysis of ISA1307 genomic DNA fragments whose expression was found to be required for increased acetic acid tolerance in S. cerevisiae
The in silico analysis of the 31 selected genomic DNA fragments from the Z. bailii-derived interspecies hybrid strain ISA1307 led to the identification of a number of ORFs which are putative candidate determinants of tolerance to the acid. Since we found that the expression of DNA inserts containing only one putative truncated ORF also led to the increase of haa1Δ tolerance to acetic acid, the incomplete ORFs were also considered for further analysis and the presence of conserved functional domains in the identified inserts was investigated. However, the truncated ORFs comprising less than 15 % of the complete sequence, which contained limited portions of conserved domains or no conserved domains, were disregarded at this phase, resulting in the selection of 32 complete and 33 truncated putative candidate ORFs (Additional file 2).
For each ISA1307 selected ORF, the predicted S. cerevisiae homologous gene and the corresponding functional description were gathered (Additional file 2). References to previous studies in which the deletion of the gene was already described as leading to an increase or decrease of yeast susceptibility to acetic acid or other weak acids are also indicated. Since the strain ISA1307 is an interspecies hybrid between Z. bailii and a closely related species [14] , Additional file 2 also includes information regarding the nucleotide Fig. 1 Genomic library screening to search for determinants of acetic acid tolerance in the strain ISA1307. Schematic representation of the screening of the Z. bailii-derived interspecies hybrid strain ISA1307 genomic library carried out in this study to search for determinants of acetic acid tolerance, able to rescue the susceptibility phenotype of S. cerevisiae BY4741_haa1Δ sequence identity of each ORF present in the different DNA inserts with Z. bailii CLIB213 T genome [18] to identify the ORFs that likely are from Z. bailii. Interestingly, about one half of the selected DNA inserts that were able to rescue the haa1Δ mutant susceptibility phenotype to acetic acid is, presumably, derived from the parental Z. bailii species (99-100 % identity with CLIB213
T genome) while the other half is, apparently, derived from the other yeast species closely related to Z. bailii (93-98 % identity with CLIB213 T genome).
ORFs with no homology with S. cerevisiae genes For 7 out of the 65 ORFs identified amongst the ISA1307 genomic DNA fragments resulting from the screening, no homology with S. cerevisiae genes could be found. In order to obtain additional information that could support the elucidation of their possible function and contribution to confer protection against acetic acid in the S. cerevisiae haa1Δ mutant, a prediction of conserved functional domains [19] and transmembrane helices (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/) was attempted. The information gathered for these ORFs is summarised in Table 1 that also includes the detected similarities with other organisms (using the PEDANT database). The DNA inserts E13 and S06, each one holding two complete ORFs, were considered to deserve further attention. The ORF ZBAI_09903 from the E13 DNA insert has homology with pyruvate decarboxylases from different organisms and contains a pyrimidine binding domain (PYR) that can be found in many key metabolic enzymes. The DNA insert E13 also contains the ORF ZBAI_09904 whose encoded protein has a domain characteristic of DNA and RNA helicases, but shows weak similarities with yeast helicases. Moreover, the two ORFs present in the insert S06, which was found to be the best suppressor of the acetic acid susceptibility phenotype of mutant haa1Δ and among the best five genomic library inserts whose expression led to increased tolerance to acetic acid in the parental strain, encode two putative membrane proteins. Specifically, ZBAI_02295 holds a domain associated with the DUP family of proteins of unknown function that were suggested to be involved in membrane trafficking processes [20] and ZBAI_02296 contains a PRK15313 domain related to autotransport proteins. Both ORFs have homologues in Z. rouxii. These observations reinforce the idea that at least one of these two ORFs is a strong candidate to be considered as a determinant of acetic acid tolerance. Given the apparent relevance of the insert S06 and to test the proposed hypothesis, the individual subcloning of these two ORFs was performed.
The ORF ZBAI_02295 is required for tolerance to acetic acid
The two ORFs present in S06 genomic library DNA insert were subcloned by homologous recombination in the expression vector pGREG506 containing a galactose inducible promoter (GAL1) and then expressed in both S. cerevisiae BY4741_ haa1Δ and parental background strains to search for increased tolerance to acetic acid. The heterologous expression of pGREG506_ZBAI_02295 in haa1Δ mutant strain was found to lead to a considerable increase of tolerance to acetic acid up to the level of the parental strain with the empty plasmid, with a pronounced decrease in the duration of the latency phase and an increase in the specific growth rate compared with control cells (Fig. 3) . This effect was barely detected when the parental strain was used as host cell, even Fig. 2 Growth curves of the best strains considering acetic acid tolerance obtained by transformation of S. cerevisiae BY4741_haa1Δ and BY4741 parental with ISA1307 genomic library plasmids. a S. cerevisiae BY4741_haa1Δ transformed with the empty vector (□) and with plasmids holding DNA fragments from the strain ISA1307 genomic library B02 (■), B18 (▲), L04 (♦), S06 (▼) and X25 (•) cloned in vector pRS316. S. cerevisiae BY4741 parental strain transformed with the empty vector (○) was included in the same 96-well microplate as a positive control. b S. cerevisiae BY4741 parental strain transformed with the empty vector (○) or with plasmids containing DNA fragments from the strain ISA1307 genomic library B02 (■), B18 (▲), S06 (▼), S07 (+) and W08 (×). The selected strains were those with a significant decreased duration of the latency period of the deletion mutant or in the parental strain when compared with the corresponding strain containing the empty vector. The growth curves were performed in MM4 medium (pH 4.0) without uracil, supplemented with 60 mM acetic acid (pH 4.0) and are representative of at least three independent growth assays that gave rise to similar growth curves though we have used increased concentrations of acetic acid (65 and 70 mM) in order to obtain an inhibitory effect equivalent to the one observed in the mutant haa1Δ (results not shown). On the other hand, the expression of the ORF ZBAI_02296 caused an increase in the duration of the lag phase for both strains (Fig. 3) , which indicates that it can be harmful in the context of acetic acid tolerance. For control purposes, Fig. 3 also shows the growth curves of both strains transformed with pGREG506 or pGREG506_noHIS3, that is the same cloning vector but with the HIS3 gene, controlled by the GAL1 promoter, removed. This new construction was needed to prepare the correct controls since the recombinant plasmids lose the HIS3 gene active mark and also because the auxotrophy of the host cells (his − ) implicates an alteration of the acetic acid tolerance depending on histidine availability. Although in the case of the parental strain the removal of the HIS3 gene from the expression vector had no detectable implications in the growth curve of the transformed cells, the expression of this gene in haa1Δ cells confers a significant advantage when acetic acid is present. Therefore pGREG506_noHIS3 plasmid was considered the correct empty cloning vector to be used to transform the control cells.
The results of the expression experiments support the idea that the ORF ZBAI_02295 should be considered as a strong candidate determinant of tolerance to acetic acid in strain ISA1307. On the contrary, the expression of ORF ZBAI_02296 had a negative effect in S. cerevisiae tolerance to acetic acid and for this reason it was not considered as a candidate determinant.
The next step was to narrow down the list of the remaining 63 selected ORFs in an attempt to identify the most promising candidate genes for determinants of tolerance to acetic acid. Although all the selected ORFs are potential candidates, it is essential to understand the relevance of each one when several ORFs are present in the same insert. Due to the difficult genetic engineering of Zygosaccharomyces genus in general, and of the Glutathione S-transferase from Macrophomina phaseolina (charcoal rot fungus) and putative uncharacterized proteins from Torulaspora delbrueckii and several fungi.
Domains related with the Glutathione Stransferase family. In particular, the portion which is present in the DNA library fragment possesses a C-terminal alpha helical domain of the GST family. Percentage of nucleotides present in the truncated ORFs, compared with the total ORF sequence, is indicated in parentheses ISA1307 hybrid strain in particular, no deletion mutant could be constructed and, consequently, the direct confirmation of the role of each putative candidate ORF in acetic acid tolerance in this specific strain was limited. Therefore, the selection of strong candidate determinants of acetic acid tolerance among the ORFs present in each DNA insert able to rescue the susceptibility phenotype of the S. cerevisiae haa1Δ mutant was based on the presumption that sole ORFs present in DNA inserts that were able to suppress the acetic acid susceptibility phenotype of haa1Δ are the cause of the increased tolerance. Some of these ORFs homologues were already mentioned as contributing to S. cerevisiae tolerance to acetic acid and/or other weak acids, supporting the criterion used. The list of inserts containing the strong candidate determinants of acetic acid tolerance selected during this work is presented in Table 2 (a selection from Additional file 2). The strong candidate determinants of tolerance, according to the mentioned criterion, are represented in bold in both Table 2 and Additional file 2. The ORF ZBAI_02295, whose role in acetic acid tolerance was confirmed by subcloning experiments, is also included. It is important to refer that the expression of truncated ORFs was found to apparently confer tolerance to acetic acid, given that this was observed when a single incomplete ORF was present in the insert. This is for example the case of S. cerevisiae truncated MSN4 and WSC4 homologues that are present in the DNA inserts B02 and 23.1, respectively. For the inserts where several complete and/or truncated ORFs are present it is not possible, at this phase, to decide which of the various ORFs is indeed involved in conferring increased tolerance to acetic acid without the subcloning and functional expression of each single ORF. Nevertheless, previous reports from the literature on the role of a considerable number of these ORFs in S. cerevisiae tolerance to weak acids provide good indications of where to start. In summary, and taking into account the aforementioned criterion, the following S. cerevisiae gene homologues were selected and proposed herein as strong candidate determinants of acetic acid tolerance in the strain ISA1307: GYP8 and WSC4 (cellular transport and transport routes), PMT1, KTR7 and RKR1 (protein fate), TIF3 (protein synthesis), ILV3 (amino acid metabolism) and MSN4 (transcription).
Complementation of acetic acid susceptibility of S. cerevisiae mutants deleted for genes homologous to ISA1307 tolerance candidate genes In order to confirm the hypothesized role of the strong candidate determinants of acetic acid tolerance proposed, plasmids from ISA1307 genomic library containing a single complete or incomplete ORF were expressed in the haploid S. cerevisiae mutant lacking the corresponding homologous gene (Fig. 4) . The expression of the library plasmids containing GYP8, KTR7, MSN4 or WSC4 homologues was confirmed to rescue the acetic acid susceptibility phenotype of the corresponding S. cerevisiae deletion mutant. Specifically, an increase of the maximum specific growth rate was clearly observed when these library plasmids were individually expressed, as well as a reduction of the duration of the latency period even when compared with the parental strain carrying the empty plasmid. Although the expression of the TIF3 homologue in Fig. 3 Effect of the expression of ZBAI_02295 or ZBAI_02296 in S. cerevisiae parental strain BY4741 and derived deletion mutant haa1Δ. Growth curves of S. cerevisiae BY4741 parental (a) and haa1Δ (b) strains transformed with pGREG506_ZBAI_02295 (△,▲), pGREG506_ZBAI_02296 (▽,▼), pGREG506_noHIS3 (□,■) and pGREG506 (○,•). Growth was performed in MM4 medium (pH 4.0) without uracil and containing 1 % (w/v) galactose, supplemented with 60 mM acetic acid (open symbols) and in the same conditions without acetic acid (closed symbols). The growth curves are representative of at least three independent growth assays that gave rise to similar results the corresponding library plasmid also decreased the duration of the latency period in S. cerevisiae tif3Δ, it did not fully complement the high acetic acid susceptibility phenotype of tif3Δ up to the parental strain level. Since at the concentration of acetic acid used in the complementation experiments S. cerevisiae BY4741_rkr1Δ is mildly susceptible to acetic acid, the effect of the expression in this mutant of the RKR1 homologue in the duration of the latency phase in the presence of acetic acid was barely detected. The expression of the library plasmid containing the essential ILV3 homologous gene in the diploid strain S. cerevisiae BY4743 lacking a copy of ILV3 gene also led to the decrease of the duration of the latency phase of both ilv3Δ and parental strains. In the case of pmt1Δ, a slight complementation of the susceptibility phenotype was achieved with the expression of the corresponding genomic library plasmid.
As previously mentioned, when expressed in the yeast host cell the inserts containing MSN4 and TIF3 homologues were among the best suppressors of the acetic acid susceptibility phenotype of haa1Δ mutant, also The putative function of each ORF was assigned based on the function of each S. cerevisiae homologous gene (www.yeastgenome.org). The functional category is provided in bold f List of the studies involving the S. cerevisiae corresponding deletion mutant susceptibility or resistance phenotypes under weak acid stress (S) -the single deletion mutant is susceptible to the acid; (R) -the single deletion mutant is resistant to the acid leading to a remarkable increase of acetic acid tolerance in the parental strain. Given that the role of these genes in the context of S. cerevisiae tolerance to weak acids was already reported in literature, they were selected for further experiments.
Expression of Z. bailii genes ZbMSN4 and ZbTIF3 in Z. bailii and S. cerevisiae strains
The involvement of Z. bailii MSN4 homologue in acetic acid tolerance was investigated based on the expression of this gene in S. cerevisiae BY4741 parental and derived Fig. 4 Expression of ISA1307 genomic library plasmids containing a single ORF in S. cerevisiae mutants deleted for the corresponding homologous gene. Growth curves of S. cerevisiae mutants gyp8Δ, ktr7Δ, rkr1Δ, msn4Δ, pmt1Δ, wsc4Δ, tif3Δ and ilv3Δ transformed with the corresponding plasmid from the strain ISA1307 genomic library, specifically 8.23, S07, Y08, B02, 18.22, 23.1, B18 and 23.17, respectively, which contained the putative ISA1307 homologue of the S. cerevisiae gene deleted in each mutant (■) or with the empty vector (□). Strains were cultivated in MM4 medium (pH 4.0) without uracil or in this same basal medium supplemented with 60 mM (a), 40 mM (b) and 65 mM (c) of acetic acid. S. cerevisiae BY4741 and BY4743 parental strains were also transformed with the empty vector (○) for control purposes. The growth curves shown are representative of three independent assays deletion mutant msn4Δ, and in S. cerevisiae W303-1A parental and derived double deletion mutant msn2Δmsn4Δ strains (Fig. 5) . Since ISA1307 hybrid genome contains two copies of the MSN4 homologue that have similar 5′ and 3′ ends, it would be very difficult to amplify only the desired Z. bailii copy and for this reason strain Z. bailii IST302 was used to amplify the MSN4 homologue ZbMSN4. Results of this heterologous expression show that ZbMSN4 under the control of S. cerevisiae MSN4 promoter increases the tolerance of the parental S. cerevisiae strains BY4741 and W303-1A and derived deletion mutant strains msn4Δ and msn2Δmsn4Δ. While in W303-1A_msn2Δmsn4Δ strain the expression of ZbMSN4 nearly complemented the acetic acid susceptibility phenotype to the level of the parental strain, in BY4741_msn4Δ the expression of the gene significantly improved the acetic acid tolerance even above the level of tolerance exhibited by its parental strain, as in the case of the complementation with the library plasmid B02. These results show that IST302 ZbMSN4 under the influence of S. cerevisiae MSN4 promoter in the selected expression vector overcomes the effect of the native S. cerevisiae MSN4 and is effective enough to counteract the lack of the two transcription factors in the double deletion mutant. Extra copies of ZbMSN4 and ZbTIF3 from Z. bailii IST302 were also expressed in this same strain. Results confirm that Z. bailii IST302 containing the recombinant vector with the extra copy of either ZbMSN4 or ZbTIF3 is significantly more tolerant to acetic acid in comparison with the host strain with the empty expression vector (Fig. 6) . Fig. 5 Effect of the expression of ZbMSN4 in S. cerevisiae strains BY4741 parental and derived deletion mutant msn4Δ (a) and W303-1A parental and derived double deletion mutant msn2Δmsn4Δ (b). Growth curves of S. cerevisiae parental strains BY4741 (a) and W303-1A (b) (filled symbols) and the corresponding derived deletion mutants msn4Δ (a) and msn2Δmsn4Δ (b) (empty symbols) transformed either with the empty vector (○,•) or with pGREG506_promMSN4Sc_ZbMSN4 (□,■). S. cerevisiae BY4741 background strains were cultivated in MM4 medium (pH 4.0) without uracil or in this same basal medium supplemented with 65 mM (a), and S. cerevisiae W303-1A background strains were cultivated in MM5 medium (pH 4.0) without uracil or in this same basal medium supplemented with 60 mM (b). The growth curves shown are representative of three independent assays
In order to get clues on the genes/proteins involved in the high intrinsic tolerance to acetic acid of the Z. bailiiderived interspecies hybrid strain ISA1307, we have explored a previously constructed genomic library from this strain, as well as the available information on its full genome sequence which was released and annotated during the progress of this study [14] . Considering the experimental design of the screening carried out to search for genes required for maximal tolerance to acetic acid, it was not expected that the identification of ISA1307 HAA1 homologue would fail. Indeed, based on the information retrieved from the PEDANT database, two copies of a putative HAA1-homologue are present in the genome of this hybrid strain (ZBAI_01494 and ZBAI_05761) sharing, respectively, 50 and 47 % identity with S. cerevisiae HAA1 nucleotide sequence (pairwise alignment performed at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/psa/ (European Bioinformatics Institute)). The fact is that when the genomic library used in the screening was constructed [15] , it was assumed that the size of ISA1307 genome was similar to the size of S. cerevisiae genome (12 Mb). However, following genome sequencing, the genome size of this hybrid strain was found to have approximately 22 Mb [14] . This means that the genomic library tested is poorly representative of the full ISA1307 genome and thus a full functional HAA1 gene sequence may be missing in the library. Also, we cannot exclude at this time the possibility that ISA1307 Haa1 proteins do not have in this highly acetic acid tolerant strain the important role demonstrated for the S. cerevisiae homologue or that the HAA1 homologous genes in this strain are not functional.
The genes emerging from this study derive at similar proportions from each of the two parental strains of the hybrid strain ISA1307. Remarkably, the differences registered in the two alleles of ISA1307, at the nucleotide level, have apparently no impact in the amino acid sequence of the encoded proteins identified in our study as potential determinants of tolerance to acetic acid. In fact, only six gene pairs in ISA1307 whole genome exhibit nucleotide differences (rate of non-synonymous substitutions (dN) and synonymous substitutions (dS) above 1) with an impact in the amino acid sequence of the encoded proteins [14] .
The mechanisms behind yeast adaptation and tolerance to weak acids stress are multifactorial [9] . In other words, yeast tolerance does not rely in a single key cellular process, so it would be expectable that the candidate determinants of acetic acid tolerance emerging from this study are related to different functions in cell. Indeed, the genes identified in our screening as strong candidate determinants of acetic acid tolerance in the highly tolerant strain ISA1307 include genes presumably involved in functions such as cellular transport and transport routes, protein fate, protein synthesis, amino acid metabolism and transcription, as detailed below. The ORFs identified in this study that share poor or no homology with S. cerevisiae genes should also be considered as relevant, in particular ZBAI_09903 that holds a pyrimidine binding domain of pyruvate decarboxylase required for the conversion of pyruvate into acetaldehyde and ethanol. Interestingly, a pyruvate decarboxylase enzyme, involved in pyruvate fermentation to acetaldehyde and ethanol, was recently reported as being up-regulated in acetic acidgrown ISA1307 cells compared to cells grown on glucose [16] . Moreover, the deletion of PDC1, coding for S. cerevisiae pyruvate decarboxylase, was found to lead to a susceptibility phenotype in cells exposed to acetic and propionic acids [7, 8] .
Among the strong candidate determinants of acetic acid tolerance we identified GYP8 and WSC4 homologues, putatively involved in cellular transport, in particular vesicular transport. The processes of transport vesicle formation, targeting, docking and tethering require complex molecular machinery. Different Ras-like GTPases contribute to these activities by acting as key regulators in assembling specific protein complexes at different donor and target membranes [21] [22] [23] . In S. cerevisiae, GYP8 encodes a GTPase-activating protein for Ypt/Rab GTPases, which plays an essential function in endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi vesicular protein transport. S. cerevisiae gyp8Δ was found to be sensitive to acetic acid and the expression of the Z. bailii GYP8 homologue, sharing 99 % identity with Z. bailii CLIB213 T , led to a suppression of the mutant phenotype providing evidences of a similar function in Z. bailii. To our best knowledge, this is the first time that this gene is related with increased tolerance to acetic acid in yeast. Also in the context of cellular transport, we found that the expression of WSC4 homologue (presumably derived from the non-Z. bailii parental strain) suppresses the susceptibility phenotype of S. cerevisiae wsc4Δ mutant. S. cerevisiae Wsc4 is specifically involved in the translocation of soluble secretory proteins and insertion of membrane proteins into the ER membrane. In addition to its role in protein trafficking activity, Wsc4 was also described to play a role in S. cerevisiae response to a number of stresses, namely to heat shock, exposure to ethanol or 4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide (4-NQO), a DNA-damaging agent [24] . To our knowledge, there is no published information about the increased susceptibility to weak acids of wsc4Δ mutant, but the WSC4 gene was found to be upregulated after exposure to acetic acid by two-fold in S. cerevisiae [6] . Moreover, it is known that this gene is coregulated by the weak acid-responsive transcription factors Haa1 and Rim101 in response to acetic acid stress [6] .
Genes homologous to S. cerevisiae RKR1, PMT1 and KTR7, putatively involved in modification and degradation of proteins, were also considered strong candidate determinants of acetic acid tolerance. In S. cerevisiae, both PMT1 and KTR7 code for mannosyltransferases that have been described as key enzymes for protein glycosylation known to be essential for cell wall rigidity [25, 26] . The remodelling of cell wall is considered a common response to several environmental stresses [8] . In the specific case of weak acid stress, such remodelling is known to be an essential adaptive response that presumably leads to the reduction of the diffusion rate of the undissociated weak acid form into the cell interior, limiting the futile cycle resulting from the continuous uptake of the lipophilic form by passive diffusion followed by the active expulsion of the counterion through specific transporters [27, 28] . Remarkably, the family-related S. cerevisiae gene KTR4, encoding another mannosyltransferase involved in protein glycosylation, was previously identified as a determinant of acetic acid tolerance [8] .
The ILV3 homologue was also identified as a strong candidate determinant of acetic acid tolerance. In S. cerevisiae, ILV3 codes for a dihydroxyacid dehydratase that catalyzes the third step in the pathways leading to biosynthesis of branched-chain amino acids [29] . Interestingly, the content of Ilv3 was found to be higher in acetic acid-challenged yeast cells, compared with unstressed cells [30] .
Among the DNA inserts identified during the present work, the best inserts whose expression confers a high protective effect against acetic acid stress in both the parental and the deletion mutant strains are S06 and those containing MSN4 or TIF3 homologues.
The ORF ZBAI_02295, one of two ORFs included in S06 insert and presumably involved in membrane trafficking, was identified as being responsible for the considerable increase in the acetic acid tolerance of the haa1Δ mutant, but not of the parental strain, thereby suggesting that the expression of ZBAI_02295 can support the function of Haa1 targets in S. cerevisiae but cannot, at least individually, further enhance the acetic acid tolerance of the parental strain. The contribution of the encoding protein, containing a functional domain associated to the uncharacterised DUP family to acetic acid tolerance, is still unclear. DUP proteins were previously suggested as being connected to membrane trafficking and hypothesized as being involved in the trafficking of membrane transporters [20, 31] . Results gathered from large-scale chemical genomics screenings suggest that intracellular trafficking processes are required for weak acid tolerance [9] . Moreover, the genes of the DUP240 family in S. cerevisiae YAR028W and YAR029W were found to be up-regulated, their transcription being Haa1 dependent, in cells exposed to acetic acid stress [6] , reinforcing the idea that this family of proteins is involved in yeast response and tolerance to acetic acid and that the expression of ZBAI_02295 in haa1Δ can compensate the abolishment of YAR028W and YAR029W transcription and therefore elevate the acetic acid susceptibility of the mutant up to the level of the parental strain. This increase of tolerance was not observed in the parental cells maybe because the putative membrane protein originated from the ORF ZBAI_02295 does not bring any advantage in cells where the Haa1 regulon is transcribed. The fact that the expression of S06 insert, which contains ZBAI_02295 and ZBAI_02296, leads to the increase of the acetic acid tolerance of the parental strain may be due to the conjugated effect of both ORFs and also to the different conditions used, namely the medium composition and the cloning vector. The expression of the genes from S06 DNA insert under the control of their native promoters compared with the individual expression of each gene under the GAL1 inducible promoter can be different and it is likely that the overproduction of the two putative membrane proteins encoded by these ORFs might be deleterious to the host cell.
The relevance of TIF3 homologue as a putative translation initiation factor in yeast tolerance to acetic acid may rely on the fact that stressed cells generate stressresponsive programmes consisting on a specific upregulation of translation initiation towards the induction of specific adaptation proteins, while a rapid inhibition of protein synthesis in general occurs, in order to rationalize the consumption of resources [32] . Using the nonflocculating Z. bailii strain IST302, it was possible to confirm that the increased expression of ZbTIF3 in this same strain enhances its tolerance to acetic acid. ISA1307 MSN4 gene is homologous to S. cerevisiae paralogous genes encoding the transcription factors Msn2 and Msn4. These transcription factors are involved in the regulation of genes of the general stress response and, despite their high homology, both proteins play non-redundant and condition-specific roles in gene expression regulation in S. cerevisiae [33] . Interestingly, it was found that both the Haa1 and Msn2/4 regulons share a total of 23 acetic acidactivated genes [6] . For this reason, it is likely that the strain ISA1307 Msn4 homologue has the ability to suppress haa1Δ susceptibility phenotype in S. cerevisiae. Remarkably, ISA1307 Msn4 homologue was indeed one of the best acetic acid susceptibility suppressors found in the screening. Moreover, the expression of ZbMSN4 from IST302 either in S. cerevisiae parental strains BY4741 and W303-1A or the derived deletion mutants msn4Δ and msn2Δmsn4Δ confers increased protection against acetic acid, indicating that ZbMsn4 has a role similar to its homologous S. cerevisiae protein. In addition, the increased expression of ZbMSN4 in Z. bailii IST302 also elevated this strain's tolerance to acetic acid, confirming this putative transcription factor as an important determinant of acetic acid resistance in Z. bailii.
In the present study we have identified several strong candidate determinants of tolerance to acetic acid in the intrinsically highly acetic acid tolerant Z. bailii-derived hybrid strain ISA1307. Specifically, this is the case of the following S. cerevisiae homologues presumably involved in different cellular processes -GYP8 and WSC4 (cellular transport and transport routes), PMT1, KTR7 and RKR1 (protein fate), TIF3 (protein synthesis), ILV3 (amino acid metabolism), MSN4 (transcription) -and of ZBAI_02295 (homologous to membrane proteins of unknown function and presumably involved in cellular trafficking). The overexpression of ZbMSN4 and ZbTIF3 genes, which were confirmed as playing a relevant role in acetic acid tolerance in yeast through their homologous and heterologous expression in Z. bailii and S. cerevisiae strains, may be useful considering the improvement of yeast cell robustness against acetic acid if the objective is their use as cell factories.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae deletion mutant strain BY4741_haa1Δ, derived from the parental strain BY4741 (MATa, his3Δ1, leu2Δ0, met15Δ0, ura3Δ0) and obtained from the EUROSCARF collection was used as the host strain for the screening of acetic acid determinants of tolerance in a Zygosaccharomyces bailii-derived interspecies hybrid strain ISA1307 using a previously constructed genomic library [15] . Strains gyp8Δ, ktr7Δ, rkr1Δ, msn4Δ, pmt1Δ, tif3Δ and wsc4Δ derived from the same S. cerevisiae parental strain were used for phenotype complementation assays. Since the deletion of ILV3 gene in the haploid background strain BY4741 is lethal, the ilv3Δ mutant used in phenotype complementation assays was derived from the diploid parental strain BY4743 (MATa/a, his3Δ1/his3Δ1, leu2Δ0/leu2Δ0, lys2Δ0/LYS2, MET15/ met15Δ0, ura3Δ0/ura3Δ0) with one copy of ILV3 deleted. S. cerevisiae strains W303-1A (MATa, leu2Δ3, 112 trp1Δ1, can1Δ100, ura3Δ1, ade2Δ1, his3Δ11,15) and derived double deletion mutant msn2Δmsn4Δ [34] were used for complementation assays of MSN4 from Z. bailii IST302 (ZbMSN4). This strain was isolated from a spontaneous fermentation of grape must from Douro wine-producing areas and its genome was recently sequenced and annotated in our laboratory (unpublished results). The taxonomic identification of Z. bailii IST302 was confirmed by comparing the partial 26S ribosomal DNA sequence (Additional file 3) with other DNA sequences from Z. bailii strains using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Strain IST302 was used for the amplification of ZbMSN4 and ZbTIF3 genes that were cloned into pZ 3 bT. This strain was also used as a host cell for the expression of an extra copy of its ZbMSN4 and ZbTIF3 genes. Escherichia coli XL1-Blue was used for plasmid maintenance and general cloning procedures. E. coli cells were grown in Luria-Bertani medium (LB), supplemented with 150 μg/ml ampicillin when required. Yeast strains were batch-cultured at 30°C with orbital agitation Screening of the genomic library from Z. bailii-derived interspecies hybrid strain ISA1307 Transformation of S. cerevisiae BY4741_haa1Δ with strain ISA1307 genomic library
The ISA1307 strain genomic library constructed by Rodrigues et al. [15] in the pRS316 vector [35] was used in this work. This plasmid is a shuttle vector for S. cerevisiae and E. coli, containing origins of replication for both species and Amp r and URA3 genes as selection markers. Moreover, this cloning vector is a centromeric plasmid, possessing an S. cerevisiae centromere (CEN6). The choice for a low copy plasmid is useful for isolation of genes that may have a toxic effect when present in multiple copies. For library plasmid DNA isolation, E. coli cells containing the genomic library were grown at 26°C on LB medium supplemented with ampicillin until late stationary-phase and plasmid DNA was extracted from these cells using the QIAprep® Spin Maxiprep Kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. S. cerevisiae BY4741_haa1Δ strain was transformed with library plasmid DNA, using the lithium acetate method [36] . The transformation mixture was plated onto solid MM4 medium without uracil and plates were incubated at 30°C for 3 days.
Selection of the transformants showing more tolerance to acetic acid was performed in 96-well microplates containing liquid MM4 medium without uracil at pH 4.0. At the end of the day, a first plate containing 200 μl of liquid medium was inoculated with cells taken from the different yeast transformants under study, and incubated at 30°C overnight with orbital agitation at 250 rpm. On the next morning, each inoculum was diluted and used to inoculate a microplate containing the same liquid media supplemented with 60 mM of acetic acid, at an initial OD 600nm of about 0.05. This plate was incubated at 30°C for 24 h under stirring at 250 rpm and after that time period the culture OD 600 nm was measured (VersaMax microplate reader, Molecular Devices). The tolerance of transformants to acetic acid was based on these values of growth observed after 24 h of incubation. Candidates were considered susceptible to acetic acid when OD 600nm reached values below 0.250, while candidates with an intermediate tolerance phenotype to acetic acid exhibited an OD 600nm between 0.250 and 0.350 and the tolerant candidates an OD 600nm above 0.350. S. cerevisiae BY4741_haa1Δ was used as the negative control as it is particularly susceptible to 60 mM acetic acid, pH 4.0, being unable to grow within the period of incubation used.
Comparison of the tolerance of the selected candidates to acetic acid A confirmation screening of acetic acid tolerance phenotype was performed with the isolation of total DNA from yeast transformants selected as the most tolerant to acetic acid. DNA was used to transform E. coli XL1-Blue strain competent cells by electroporation using Bio-Rad Gene Pulser II (400 Ω, 25 μF, 2.5 kV). The transformants obtained were selected for ampicillin resistance and cultivated for 12 h in 3 ml of LB liquid medium with ampicillin at 37°C with an orbital agitation of 250 rpm. For plasmid isolation from E. coli a QIAprep® Spin Miniprep Kit was used, according to the manufacturer's instructions. The extracted DNA was then used to transform the parental strain S. cerevisiae BY4741 and the derived deletion mutant BY4741_haa1Δ, using the lithium acetate method [36] . Growth curves of these strains in liquid media, either in the absence or presence of acetic acid were determined. Cells were grown in MM4 medium without uracil at pH 4.0 until exponential phase (OD 600nm of 0.5 ± 0.05) and then re-inoculated at an OD 600nm of 0.05, in 50 ml of fresh medium, either or not supplemented with 60 mM of acetic acid. Growth was followed by measuring culture OD 600nm during batch cultivation at 30°C with an orbital agitation of 250 rpm. The parental strain S. cerevisiae BY4741 and the mutant BY4741_haa1Δ both transformed with the empty vector were used as controls. The suppressors of acetic acid susceptibility phenotype of BY4741_haa1Δ were selected and submitted to further sequence analysis. Finally, an additional confirmation step of the phenotype of BY4741_haa1Δ cells transformed with the sequenced suppressors was performed by repeating their growth curves in control conditions and in the presence of 60 mM of acetic acid in 96-well microplates (FilterMax F5, Multi-mode microplate reader, Molecular Devices), at 30°C. Microplate reads were carried out every 10 min using a 595 nm absorbance filter. An orbital agitation of three seconds was performed prior to each read. The growth curves of S. cerevisiae BY4741 parental strain transformed with these same suppressors were repeated as well. The plates were inoculated with cells in exponential phase (OD 600nm of 0.5 ± 0.05) at an initial OD 600nm of 0.05.
In order to be comparable, all the growth curves must come from the same plate, since the level of inhibition of the acid is hardly reproducible from plate to plate due to the extremely small volume contained in each well. So, all the parental strain transformants were grown in the same plate, and the same was done for the transformants of the deletion mutant BY4741_haa1Δ. For comparison purposes between the transformants from the two different backgrounds, the growth curve of the parental strain with the empty vector was included in the plates with the BY4741_haa1Δ transformants.
In silico analysis of the selected plasmid DNA inserts from strain ISA1307 genomic library
The complete DNA sequence of the selected plasmid inserts from strain ISA1307 genomic library was obtained in two steps. First, approximately 1000 bp of the DNA sequence ends of each plasmid insert were sequenced using vector specific primers (forward and reverse). Second, the complete sequence of the plasmid insert was acquired by alignment of the sequenced ends against the genome sequence of the strain ISA1307 available in the PEDANT database (http://pedant.helmholtz-muenchen.de/genomes.jsp?Category=fungal) [37] . This sequence was part of a high-throughput DNA sequencing project, based on Illumina paired-end sequencing, carried out by our group [14] . The in silico analysis of each DNA plasmid insert from the genomic library was performed also using the PEDANT database and the genomic browser GBrowse_syn (http://mips.helmholtzmuenchen.de/gbrowse2/cgi-bin/gbrowse_syn/zbailii) [38] that returns all the putative open reading frames (ORFs) present in the DNA fragment based on sequence homology with S. cerevisiae. Additionally, this tool provides the synteny alignments for the Z. bailii-derived interspecies hybrid strain ISA1307 genome versus the genomes of Z. bailii CLIB213 T , Z. rouxii and S. cerevisiae. When the plasmid DNA insert contained truncated ORFs, the presence of specific functional domains was assessed using the Conserved Domain Database of the NCBI [19] . The description of each gene was based on the information gathered in Saccharomyces Genome Database (www.yeastgenome.org) for the corresponding putative homologue.
Cloning and expression of ZBAI_02295 and ZBAI_02296 in S. cerevisiae
The pGREG506 plasmid from the DRAG & DROP collection [39] was used to individually clone by homologous recombination and express the genes ZBAI_02295 and ZBAI_02296 identified in the S06 DNA fragment from ISA1307 genomic library. That cloning vector was acquired from Euroscarf and contains a HIS3 gene under the control of a galactose inducible promoter (GAL1) and the yeast selectable marker URA3. During homologous recombination the HIS3 gene is replaced by the gene of interest. ZBAI_02295 and ZBAI_02296 DNA fragments were generated by PCR using genomic DNA extracted from the strain ISA1307 and the specific primers ZBAI_02295_FWD, ZBAI_02295_REV, ZBAI_02296_FWD and ZBAI_02296_REV, whose sequences are listed in Additional file 4. The cDNA from each gene was co-transformed into the parental strain BY4741 and derived deletion mutant haa1Δ with the pGREG506 vector, previously cut with SalI restriction enzyme. The recombinant plasmids pGREG506_ ZBAI_02295 and pGREG506_ ZBAI_02296 were obtained through homologous recombination in yeast. Correct cloning of each ORF was confirmed by DNA sequencing. Additionally, S. cerevisiae BY4741 parental and derived deletion mutant haa1Δ strains were transformed with the cloning vector pGREG506. To have the adequate control cells, both strains were transformed as well with the empty vector pGREG506 with the HIS3 gene deleted (pGREG506_noHIS3, obtained by digestion of pGREG506 with the restriction enzyme SalI), since in the recombinant vector the HIS3 gene is substituted by the insert of interest. The susceptibility to acetic acid of the parental strain BY4741 and the derived deletion mutant haa1Δ, harbouring each one of the four described plasmids (pGREG506_ ZBAI_02295, pGREG 506_ ZBAI_02296, pGREG506 and pGREG506_noHIS3) was assessed. This was possible by comparing their growth curves in liquid MM4-U medium supplemented with 1 % of galactose (w/v) pH 4.0, at 30°C with orbital agitation (250 rpm), either or not supplemented with 60 mM acetic acid, as previously described.
Complementation of S. cerevisiae deletion mutants by the corresponding Z. bailii ISA1307 single genes present in genomic library plasmids
The genomic library plasmids 8.23, 18.22, 23.1, B02, B18, S07 and Y08 carrying the single S. cerevisiae putative homologous genes GYP8, PMT1, WSC4, MSN4, TIF3, KTR7 or RKR1, respectively, were transformed in S. cerevisiae BY4741 EUROSCARF mutants lacking the respective gene. The complementation of library plasmid 23.17 carrying ILV3 was performed using the diploid BY4743 parental strain with one copy of the essential ILV3 gene deleted, because the haploid BY4741_ilv3Δ is unviable. Both S. cerevisiae parental strains transformed with the empty vector were used as control. The transformants were batch-cultivated in MM4-U medium at pH 4.0, either or not supplemented with 60 mM of acetic acid, as previously described. Since S. cerevisiae tif3Δ is highly susceptible to acetic acid, a growth medium containing a lower concentration of acetic acid (40 mM) was used. The complementation assays using the diploid strains derived from BY4743 were performed with a higher concentration (65 mM) of acetic acid.
Cloning and expression of ZbMSN4 in S. cerevisiae
The gene ZbMSN4 amplified from Z. bailii IST302 was cloned by homologous recombination into pGREG506 using the strategy above described for the cloning of ZBAI_02295 and ZBAI_02296. The primers ZbMSN4_pGREG_FWD and ZbMSN4_pGREG_REV (Additional file 4) were used for the amplification of ZbMSN4 coding region. This DNA fragment and the pGREG506 vector previously digested with SalI restriction enzyme were co-transformed into S. cerevisiae BY4741 parental strain. The obtained recombinant plasmid pGREG506_ZbMSN4 was digested with SpeI and AscI restriction enzymes to remove the GAL1 promoter from the vector. The digested vector and S. cerevisiae MSN4 promoter (approximately 1000 bp upstream the start codon) that was amplified with primers ZbMSN4prom_FWD and ZbMSN4prom_REV (Additional file 4) were co-transformed into S. cerevisiae BY4741 parental cells. The recombinant vector pGREG506_ promMSN4Sc_ZbMSN4 obtained by homologous recombination was sequenced to confirm the correct cloning of the promoter region and the gene and transformed afterwards into S. cerevisiae BY4741_msn4Δ, W303-1A parental and derived double deletion mutant msn2Δmsn4Δ strains. The susceptibility to acetic acid of the parental strains BY4741 and W303-1A and of the corresponding derived deletion mutants msn4Δ and msn2Δmsn4Δ, harbouring pGREG506_promMSN4Sc_ZbMSN4 and also pGREG506_ noHIS3 was assessed by comparing their growth curves in liquid MM4-U (BY4741 background strains) and MM5-U (W303-1A background strains), either or not supplemented with the appropriate acetic acid concentration.
Cloning and expression of an extra copy of ZbMSN4 and ZbTIF3 in Z. bailii IST302
The expression of an extra copy of ZbMSN4 and ZbTIF3 genes in the parental strain Z. bailii IST302 was performed by cloning these genes by homologous recombination into the centromeric expression vector pZ 3 bT [40] linearized with XbaI. The genes ZbMSN4 and ZbTIF3 and their corresponding promoters (approximately 1000 bp upstream the start codon) were amplified from strain IST302 genomic DNA using the primers ZbMSN4_FWD, ZbMSN4_REV, ZbTIF3_FWD and ZbTIF3_REV (Additional file 4) and cotransformed with the linearized pZ 3 bT into S. cerevisiae BY4741. Selection of the transformants holding the recombinant vectors pZ 3 bT_ ZbMSN4 and pZ 3 bT_ ZbTIF3 was performed in YPD plates containing G418 (200 mg/L). The correct recombination was confirmed by sequencing the obtained plasmids. The recombinant plasmids and the empty plasmid were used to transform Z. bailii IST302 using a commercial yeast transformation kit (MP Biomedicals, California) with minor modifications. The susceptibility to acetic acid of Z. bailii IST302 cells transformed with pZ 3 bT or with the recombinant vectors pZ 3 bT_ ZbMSN4 and pZ 3 bT_ ZbTIF3 was assessed by comparing their growth curves in liquid MM either or not supplemented with 180 or 220 mM acetic acid.
The differentiation program of the germline is distinct from somatic cells in that resetting of the epigenome by demethylation of DNA and histones must take place for proper post-fertilization development of the embryo [1] . DNA demethylation occurs during primordial germ cell (PGC) migration as part of their normal development [2] . Different elements within the genome are remethylated at distinct time windows in a sex-specific fashion. Remethylation of retrotransposons occurs in the male germline at embryonic day 17.5 (E17.5) and in the female germline during postnatal oocyte maturation [1] . The resetting of the epigenetic state of the germline followed by the acquisition of male-specific methylation imprints, while a necessary component for postfertilization development, exposes the germline to potential risk from retrotransposon mobilization [3] . Insects and mammals resolve this problem through the action of several classes of small RNAs including piRNAs (,27 nt PIWI family-interacting RNAs) [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] . Two classes of piRNAs, repeat-associated piRNAs and nonrepeat-associated piRNAs based on their similarity to retrotransposons, are present in the germline of animals as primitive as sponges [10] . Repeat-associated piRNAs limit expression of retrotransposons at the post-transcriptional level and through epigenetic silencing by the recruitment of DNA methyltransferases including DNMT3A and DNMT3L [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] . In the absence of these small RNAs, retrotransposon expression is dramatically increased in the germline, leading to DNA damage and cell death.
Regulation of retrotransposon repression is coordinated by proteins in spatially specialized compartments of ribonucleoprotein-rich structures called nuage. According to the nomenclature proposed by Chuma et al. [16] , embryonic prospermatogonia, postnatal spermatogonia and spermatocytes possess a form of nuage appearing as perinuclear granules transiently associated with mitochondria and thus termed intermitochondrial cement. In contrast, a single large granule of nuage, present in post-meiotic spermatids is called the chromatoid body [17, 18] . Multiple proteins have been localized by electron microscopy to both intermitochondrial cement and the chromatoid body including mouse VASA homolog (MVH; also called DDX4 or DEAD-box polypeptide 4), tudor-domain containing 1 (TDRD1), tudordomain containing 6 (TDRD6), and tudor-domain containing 7 (TDRD7) [19] [20] [21] . The chromatoid body is not believed to arise merely by coalescence of intermitochondrial cement granules; however, to date there are no examples of proteins localized by electron microscopy specifically to the intermitochondrial cement but absent from the chromatoid body.
Nuage are proposed sites for multiple RNA processing events including translational repression, RNA-mediated gene silencing, mRNA degradation, and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay [22] . A number of germ cell-specific mRNAs display translational repression with a lag of up to a week between their transcription and translation [23, 24] . The evidence for nuage regulation of mRNA is strongest for the chromatoid body. Translationally regulated mRNAs such as transition protein 2 (Tnp2) have been localized to the chromatoid body [25] . DEAD box helicases, including MVH/DDX4 and DDX25, which can unwind RNA in vitro, are localized to the chromatoid body [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] . MicroRNAs (,22 nt non-coding RNAs) and components of the RNA-Induced Silencing Complex (RISC) machinery including Dicer, Argonaute 2 (AGO2), and Argonaute 3 (AGO3) with demonstrated in vitro endonuclease activity, localize to the chromatoid body where they may function in translational control and mRNA stability, but their potential association with the intermitochondrial cement is not described [22, 31] . The chromatoid body also contains MILI and MIWI RNA endonucleases that generate piRNAs [32, 33] . Most MIWI-associated mRNAs in spermatids are associated with the RNP fraction with a smaller number associated with polysomes suggestive of a function in translational control [34] .
Prior to the meiotic divisions, the role of nuage in mRNA metabolism in primordial germ cells, spermatogonia, and spermatocytes is unknown. Whereas MILI is present throughout this period, MIWI2 is restricted to nuage granules in embryonic testes, and MIWI is present in those of pachytene spermatocytes [13, [35] [36] [37] . The localization of PIWI family proteins to the intermitochondrial cement has not been clearly defined, although MILI interacts with the intermitochondrial cement protein TDRD1, MVH and other nuage proteins [33, 38] . Maelstrom (MAEL), the putative 39-59 endonuclease for piRNA 39 end formation, is also associated with nuage in mammals [39] [40] [41] . Thus, multiple components necessary for piRNA generation are connected physically to nuage.
Genetic evidence supports a conserved requirement for proper nuage assembly in retrotransposon control in the germline. In Drosophila, mutants of PIWI, aubergine (AUB), AGO3, the RNA helicases VASA and armitage (ARMI), and TUDOR-domain containing proteins krimper (KRIMP) and spindle-E (SPN-E) have defects in piRNA synthesis and retrotransposon control. In Drosophila, the interaction of two PIWI family members with opposite strand polarity during nuage assembly has also been proposed to facilitate the ''ping-pong'' mechanism of amplification necessary for retrotransposon inhibition [42] . piRNA defects and derepression of retrotransposons in germ cells also occurs in zebrafish ZILI and ZIWI mutants [43, 44] . Consistent with a key role of these nuage-associated proteins in the mammalian male germline, knockouts of Mvh, Mael, Mili, and Miwi2 block at the spermatocyte stage, while knockouts of TDRD1, TDRD6, and MIWI disrupt spermatogenesis at the spermatid stage. With the exception of MVH, which has not been assessed for these defects, all other nuage mutants with a spermatocyte arrest have defects in retrotransposon regulation and piRNA production [7, 20, 35, 38, [45] [46] [47] [48] .
GASZ is a 475 amino acid Germ cell-specific protein with four Ankyrin repeats, a Sterile alpha motif, and a basic leucine Zipper domain [49] that is conserved across vertebrate evolution in amphibians, fish, birds, and mammals [50] . Our previous studies have shown that GASZ localizes to the Balbiani body, a nuage structure in Xenopus laevis oocytes. The high degree of evolutionary conservation of GASZ in vertebrates and the potential localization of GASZ to a conserved germline-specific structure stimulated our interest to determine the expression and essential roles of GASZ in nuage and its germline function in mammals.

To define the roles of GASZ in mammals, a null mutation in Gasz was generated (Figure 1 ). Gasz +/2 mice were viable and produced pups (1.0060.01 litters/month; 8.2560.29 pups/litter, n = 10) whose genotypes were consistent with Mendelian ratios (25.9% WT, 48.5% Gasz +/2 , 25.7% Gasz 2/2 ; n = 495) indicating that GASZ is not essential for embryogenesis. Whereas Gasz 2/2 females were fertile (0.9560.02 litters/month; 6.1660.32 pups/ litter), Gasz 2/2 males were sterile. Furthermore, although GASZ is a maternal effect protein [49] , observed in early preimplantation embryos, the viability of offspring from Gasz null females (i.e., oocytes lacking Gasz mRNA) indicates that maternal GASZ is also not required.

To define the cause of the infertility in Gasz 2/2 males, postnatal testes were analyzed grossly and histologically ( Figure 2 ). Testes from Gasz 2/2 males were significantly smaller (P,0.0001) than Gasz +/2 or WT littermates ( Figure 1A ). Six-week-old Gasz Figure 2H ), the seminiferous tubules of 6-week-old Gasz 2/2 testes showed markedly reduced spermatocytes, no post-meiotic spermatids or spermatozoa, and significant vacuolization ( Figure 2I-2K) . The most mature meiotic cells in seminiferous tubules from stages VII-XII were early meiotic germ cells while those from stages I-VI showed a mixture of degenerating spermatocytes. Gasz 2/2 and Gasz +/2 testes at postnatal day 5 (P5) were similar at the gross and histologic levels ( Figure S1 ). At postnatal day 10 (P10),
Many aspects of RNA processing are essential for or prominent in the differentiation of germ cells. Some RNA metabolism in animal germ cells is associated with physical structures surrounding the cell nucleus called nuage. Nuage has a distinct granular appearance prior to the meiotic divisions with unclear functions. We have identified a protein called GASZ, which plays a structural role in this early nuage. In mice lacking GASZ, retrotransposonsendogenous viral-like particles-become released from their typical repressed state in the germline by the loss of small RNAs called piRNAs, resulting in DNA damage and delayed germ cell maturation. Protection of the germline from genetic intruders may require the association of piRNA-synthesizing enzymes and other components of this nuage structure through direct or indirect associations with GASZ. Mutations in GASZ and other nuage components may contribute to infertility in men who do not produce spermatozoa.
the composition of Gasz 2/2 testes ( Figure 2C ) had not changed substantially in composition, whereas Gasz +/2 testes ( Figure 2B ) had advanced to contain preleptotene and leptotene spermatocytes. At P12, Gasz 2/2 testes ( Figure 2E ) contained predominantly spermatogonia with only 25% of the tubules containing preleptotene spermatocytes but no leptotene spermatocytes as compared with Gasz +/2 testes where more advanced zygotene spermatocytes were present ( Figure 2D ). By P14, Gasz 2/2 testes displayed early pachytene germ cell loss due to apoptosis ( Figure S3 ), with the most advanced germ cells being zygotene spermatocytes ( Figure 2G ), while Gasz +/2 testes ( Figure 2F ) had advanced to the mid-pachytene stage. Thus, histological analysis supports a consistent delay in Gasz 2/2 spermatogenesis beginning at meiotic prophase. Gasz
spermatogenesis fails at an identical point in juveniles and young adults. However, by 6 months of age, there are few germ cells in the To further confirm our histological findings, we analyzed several genes that are expressed in spermatocytes ( Figure S2 and Figure S3 ). cH2AX is expressed from late spermatogonia through pachytene spermatocytes [51] . cH2AX shifts from staining autosomes to the XY body in pachytene spermatocytes. XY body staining by cH2AX was absent from Gasz 2/2 testes, in contrast to Gasz +/2 testes ( Figure S2 ). Instead, cH2AX labeled autosomes similar to Gasz +/2 early spermatocytes or dying spermatocytes with increased intensity. Our findings are reminiscent of MILI, MIWI2, and MVH knockout mouse models that demonstrate male sterility due to a zygotene:pachytene block but normal female fertility [7, 38, 45] .
GASZ is present at low levels in the cytoplasm of type A and B spermatogonia and pre-leptotene spermatocytes, showing peak intensity in middle to late pachytene spermatocytes, and localizing to finer granules in the cytoplasm of round spermatids ( Figure S4 and Figure S5 ). Using antibodies against mitochondrial cytochrome c, GASZ was confirmed to localize to the interstices of spermatocyte mitochondrial clusters (i.e., intermitochondrial cement) ( Figure 3A and inset), consistent with our previous findings that GASZ localizes to nuage in frog oocytes [50] . GASZ partially co-localizes with TDRD1 and MVH in the intermitochondrial cement ( Figure 3B-3I ) and displays a substantial overlap with MILI in spermatocytes ( Figure 3J-3L ). Whereas TDRD1 and MVH relocalize to the chromatoid body in spermatids ( Figure 3E and 3F), GASZ fails to do so and also shows no relationship with unclustered mitochondria ( Figure 3D ). In late pachytene spermatocytes MIWI and GASZ also overlap ( Figure S6 ). MVH shows intense granular distribution in Gasz +/2 testes but is dramatically reduced in the Gasz 2/2 spermatocytes ( Figure S7 ). We also analyzed the relationship of GASZ and MILI at earlier time points to assess their interaction in immature germ cells. MILI was present in perinuclear granules in cell cycle arrested gonocytes of newborn mice ( Figure 3N ) in a distribution similar to that described in embryonic male germ cells [13] . There is a significant overlap between GASZ and MILI in newborn gonocytes ( Figure 3M-3O) . We compared the immunostaining of nuage proteins in the newborn Gasz 2/2 testis versus controls. TDRD1 was reduced but also diffusely cytoplasmic, failing to localize in a perinuclear granular pattern ( Figure 4B ). MILI was strikingly absent from the same GASZ null gonocytes ( Figure 4F ). MVH immunostaining also showed reduced granular localization ( Figure 4J ). Analysis of TDRD1 ( Figure 4D ) and MVH ( Figure 4L ) at E16.5 revealed a similar delocalization of these proteins in GASZ null gonocytes. However, MILI staining of E16.5 gonocytes ( Figure 4H ) was variable; in most germ cells, MILI staining was absent, whereas in only 2.25% (5 out of 222 gonocytes) granular MILI staining remained.
To study GASZ protein:protein interactions, we screened a P17 testis library by yeast two-hybrid analysis using full-length GASZ as bait. We found GASZ interacts with itself and RANBP9 ( Figure 5A ), a known MVH interactor that also localizes to nuage and the chromatoid body [52] . MIWI, but not MILI, or MVH, also directly interacts with GASZ ( Figure 5B ). Antibodies to GASZ could co-immunoprecipitate MIWI, TDRD1, and MVH, but not MILI or MAEL from P21 testes ( Figure 5C ). Conversely, antibodies to MIWI could also co-immunoprecipitate GASZ ( Figure 5D ). We observed a striking reduction in the amount of multiple intermitochondrial cement proteins in Gasz 2/2 testis lysates at P21 as well as at times prior to the observed spermatocyte loss ( Figure 5E ). Multiple interactions between these nuage proteins suggest that GASZ is a component of this network. Quantitative RT-PCR showed relatively modest reduction (roughly 2-fold) in the intermitochondrial cement mRNAs in contrast to their change in protein abundance ( Figure S8 and Table S1 ). Our findings by Western blot analysis were consistent with reduced MVH immunostaining of spermatocytes ( Figure S7 ) and absence of MILI in gonocytes ( Figure 4 ). We also examined newborn testes by electron microscopy for the presence of intermitochondrial cement. Although we could find nuage material associated with clustered mitochondria in most neonatal gonocytes in controls, we failed to detect this structure in Gasz 2/2 germ cells ( Figure S9 ). Our results indicate that GASZ plays a key role in the formation and/or maintenance of this network of RNA processing proteins.
There is increased retrotransposon transcription in MILI and MIWI2 null testes [7, 38] , and dying Gasz 2/2 spermatocytes have a characteristic chromatin pattern similar to these knockouts. Because of these similarities and GASZ association with MIWI, we measured levels of the retrotransposons intracisternal A particle (IAP) and long interspersed nuclear element 1 (Line L1) in the testes of P14 Gasz 2/2 mice. Quantitative RT-PCR demonstrated up to a 15-fold increase (p,0.05) in Line L1 and up to a 4-fold increase in IAP mRNA (p,0.05) in the postnatal Gasz 2/2 testis as well as similar increases in embryonic testes compared to controls ( Figure 6A and 6B). The largest increases were seen in the Line L1 ORF2 (encoding the reverse transcriptase and endonuclease domains) and IAP GAG mRNAs at P14. We saw even more dramatic increases in IAP GAG protein and Line L1 ORF1p. At P14, levels of IAP GAG and Line L1 ORF1p proteins are essentially undetectable in the WT samples but significantly upregulated in the Gasz 2/2 testes ( Figure 6C ). Likewise, in gonocytes of control newborn (P0) mice, retrotransposon proteins IAP GAG and Line L1 ORF1p were undetectable but were dramatically elevated in the cytoplasm of the Gasz 2/2 gonocytes ( Figure 6D -6G).
Consistent with compromised transposable element DNA methylation seen in MILI and MIWI2 null testes, we found significant hypomethylation of presumed germ cell-derived Line L1 and IAP sequences in Gasz 2/2 testes compared to controls at P14 ( Figure 6H ). Sequences demonstrating appropriate methylation in the Gasz knockout may reflect the presence of admixed somatic cell DNA. Thus, the delayed meiotic initiation and spermatocyte apoptosis in the Gasz 2/2 testes are likely secondary to abnormal derepression of retrotransposons in the male germline at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels.
Since increased retrotransposon expression in MILI and MIWI2 null germ cells has been ascribed to the loss of repression by repeat-associated RNAs, we evaluated their abundance by small RNA sequencing of P7, P10 and P14 Gasz +/2 and Gasz 2/2 testes using the Illumina Next Generation Sequencing platform that yields over 2 million sequence reads per sample. Control testes showed an increase in pachytene piRNAs at P14, resulting in a proportional reduction in miRNA reads contributing to the overall small RNA pool. By contrast, Gasz 2/2 testes failed to induce piRNAs, and the small RNAome (17-40 nt) was dominated by miRNAs in Gasz 2/2 testes compared to controls (71% vs. 44%, Figure 7A ). However, the overall miRNA profiles (the subset of miRNAs expressed and relative abundance) were strikingly similar in both genotypes suggesting that miRNA biogenesis and function are likely intact in the absence of GASZ; the relative increase in miRNA read abundance is a consequence of reduced piRNA sequences within a fixed sample of small RNA reads. MicroRNAs have been shown to be present in the chromatoid body, but based on our analysis, they are clearly present prior to the appearance of this structure. This observation suggests that the formation of the intermitochondrial cement and chromatoid body are not required for microRNA biogenesis, but might be important for their action on target mRNAs.
After excluding potential contributions to the Gasz null phenotype by miRNAs, we analyzed the remaining small RNAs in greater detail. This analysis revealed that most non-repeatassociated piRNAs showed a skewed distribution with 6% contributing 95-99% of the reads. There was a similar low number of known non-repeat-associated piRNAs in the control and null samples at P10 (Figure 7A ), consistent with previous studies demonstrating a robust increase at P14 pachytene stage in wild-type testes [6] . Non-repeat-associated piRNAs contributed only 14% of the piRNA reads in control testes at this age. However, 99% of the 6500 non-repeat-associated piRNAs detected in control P10 testes were reduced in Gasz 2/2 testes, 87% to undetectable levels. The decline was even more dramatic in P14 Gasz 2/2 testes when many more piRNAs are produced in the control testes ( Figure 7B and Table S2 ). Although the delayed spermatogenic development and apoptotic loss of spermatocytes could preclude the expression of these piRNAs in Gasz 2/2 testes, the concurrent increase in miRNAs and expression of prepachytene piRNAs, normally abundant by P8 [6] , indicate that these two effects are unlikely to be the cause. Over 1500 of 1700 distinct non-repeat-associated RNAs (92%) with greater abundance at P7 versus P14 were substantially reduced, and 1418 of these (90%) displayed a sustained reduction at subsequent time-points (Table S2). Twenty-seven of the 100 small RNAs displaying a relative increase in Gasz 2/2 testes appeared to be variants of miRNAs or potential passenger strands, many mapping to a miRNA cluster on the X chromosome (Table S3) . Two additional 22-23 nt sequences, DQ712837 mapping to Small Cajal body specific RNA 15 (Scarna15) and DQ688886 mapping to an intron of 1700041C02Rik, contributed 40% of the ''piRNA'' reads remaining in Gasz 2/2 testes. The 127 nt Scarna15 is predicted to form two stem-loops and DQ712837 derives from the stem of the second stem-loop. If we exclude these two likely misannotated Dicerdependent small RNAs, the non-repeat-associated piRNAs reads are 99% reduced.
Control testes express an abundance of repeat-associated small RNAs compared to the Gasz 2/2 testes ( Figure 7A and Table S4 ), which fall into two size categories that peak at 22 and 27 nt ( Figure  S10A ). While there is a small peak at 22 nt in Gasz 2/2 testes, the 27 nt peak is essentially absent. To analyze the repeat-associated piRNAs, we excluded all sequences whose length was not 25-29 nt. Many of the 19-23 nt sequences map to SINEs ( Figure  S10D and Figure S10E and Table S3 ) and typically show less than a two-fold change. These SINE-associated small RNAs belong to a novel small RNA class that are cleaved from their precursor RNA by a Dicer-dependent but DGCR8-independent mechanism [53] . We also excluded 19-23 nt sequences that did not map to SINEs as potential Dicer-dependent endo-siRNAs ( Figure S10F and Figure S10G ). All 25-29 nt repeat-associated RNAs were classified as repeat-associated piRNAs ( Figure 7C ). These repeat-associated piRNAs map to LTRs (e.g., ERV-K IAPLTR1a_I_MM and MaLR MTA_Mm_LTR) or LINEs (L1_MM), and are 10 to 100-fold less abundant in Gasz 2/2 testes ( Figure S10B and Figure  S10C and Table S4 ). The majority of the 25-29 nt repeatassociated piRNAs contained a U at position 1 and an A at position 10 ( Figure S10H ), characteristic of participation in the ''ping-pong'' synthesis reaction [54] . In contrast, the 19-23 nt repeat-associated small RNAs had an initial U but a variable position 10 ( Figure S10I ), suggesting a lack of amplification by the ''ping-pong'' mechanism and confirming that these sequences are unlikely to be synthesized by the piRNA machinery. Subsequent analysis showed that the biggest difference in repeat-associated piRNAs occurred at P7 when many more elements were affected. Thus, the defect in repeat-associated piRNA production preceding delayed meiotic prophase initiation in Gasz 2/2 testes is a cause rather than an effect of this process.
Initially, 25% of the small RNAs sequences (.1 million reads) in control testes were unclassified. The majority of the unclassified sequences were 25-29 nt ( Figure 7D and Figure S10J ), but a 19-23 nt class was also present ( Figure S10K ). The majority of these unclassified RNAs possess a 59 U but a variable 10 th position ( Figure S10L ). Because of their similarity to piRNAs, we term the 25-29 nt category of unclassified sequences as ''putative piRNAs'' while the smaller size category called ''unknown small RNAs'' may contain novel miRNAs or other Dicer-dependent small RNAs. ''Putative piRNA'' reads were reduced compared to controls at P7 (7.9% versus 0.29%), P10 (1.6% versus 16.9%) and P14 (5.10% versus 0.91%) ( Figure 7D ). These findings indicate that GASZ plays a major role prior to the pachytene stage in facilitating the production of multiple types of piRNAs, including those associated with repeats involved in regulation of retrotransposons.
GASZ was initially identified by our group as a male and female germ cell and maternal effect gene product [49] . Herein, we show that GASZ is not essential for fertility in the female germline. In contrast, absence of GASZ leads to male sterility due to a block at the zygotene-pachytene transition, reminiscent of the defect that is observed in knockouts of two PIWI family members, MILI and MIWI2 [7, 11, 38] . In frog oocytes, GASZ is expressed in the Balbiani body, a nuage structure [50] . Similarly, we show here that GASZ localizes to nuage in testicular primordial germ cells, gonocytes, spermatogonia, and spermatocytes. Using various markers, GASZ appears to be a component of the nuage termed intermitochondrial cement. We show that many nuage proteins depend upon GASZ for their normal levels. Aside from MIWI, which is expressed in germ cell types absent in the Gasz knockout, the reduction of MILI, MAEL, MVH, TDRD1, TDRD6, and TDRD7 in Gasz 2/2 testicular lysates likely reflects destabilization of this entire ultrastructural feature. TDRD1 and MVH become mislocalized in gonocytes and they become subsequently lost during postnatal spermatogenesis, suggesting that the loss of nuage proteins may result secondary to degradation following persistent failure to localize to germinal granules. The lesser change in MVH protein in GASZ null testes at P10 may indicate that MVH is less dependent upon GASZ than are the remaining nuage proteins. Perhaps this effect is due to additional proteins functionally redundant with GASZ or that MVH has a greater intrinsic stability in the absence of GASZ than other nuage proteins. Protein-protein interaction motifs in GASZ, including ankyrin domains, a sterile alpha motif, and a leucine zipper, may serve to direct the association and/or stabilization of nuage proteins. GASZ self-interaction may suggest the protein forms multimeric complexes as part of this function. A model depicting direct interactions within the nuage and proposed GASZ placement within this protein complex is provided ( Figure S11 ).
The Gasz null mice phenocopy the loss of MILI. Since the TDRD1:MILI interaction is critical [33, 48] and absence of GASZ leads to disruption of the TDRD1 distribution in the cytoplasm (Figure 4 ), MILI could be physically dislodged from its granule position in Gasz null germ cells leading to a subsequent destabilization of MILI. Although formation of intermitochondrial cement is disrupted in both Tdrd1 2/2 and Gasz 2/2 germ cells, MILI is only unstable in Gasz null cells indicating a distinct role for GASZ in stabilization of MILI. As we have shown, that all but 2.2% of germ cells at E16.5 contain MILI, and at P0, MILI is absent. Similar to the Mili null mice [6, 11, 38] , the absence of MILI in the Gasz knockout, is believed to mechanistically disrupt piRNA synthesis, resulting in an increase in retrotransposons and subsequent catastrophe for the male germ line. The current model for maintenance of transposable element repression in the germline involves the production of piRNAs by PIWI family members MILI and MIWI2 in embryonic and postnatal germ cells [6, 7] . Repeat-associated piRNAs are abundant in embryonic germ cells coincident with DNA remethylation of retrotransposons in the male germline at E17.5. GASZ is expressed in embryonic testes and co-localizes with MILI in fetal and newborn gonocytes. Transcriptional regulation of retrotransposons by antisense repeatassociated piRNAs, bound to MIWI2, whose nuclear localization depends upon MILI, has been proposed [13] . Consistent with the proposed mechanism, we observe a similar reduction of promoter methylation of IAP and Line L1 in Gasz 2/2 testes as observed in Mili 2/2 and Miwi2 2/2 testes. Mechanistically, absence of Gasz and the consequent loss of MILI and MILI-mediated retrotransposon repression affects fetal gonocytes during the interval that retrotransposon remethylation normally occurs. Although there is a continuity of the cell cycle arrest in male gonocytes between E16.5 and P0, the shift in Gasz null testes at E16.5 from slightly detectable MILI to its absence suggests that nuage is changing during this interval despite a lack of cell cycle progression. However, both MVH and TDRD1 displayed similar behavior in Gasz null testes at E16.5 and P0. Although we can find a direct interaction between GASZ and MIWI, we could not find evidence for direct interaction between GASZ and MILI. We speculate that a GASZ-MILI interaction occurs indirectly though other mediators. MVH can interact with MILI and MIWI [38] , as can TDRD1 [33, 48] both of which co-immunoprecipitate with GASZ. As shown in Figure 5A , GASZ interacts with RANBP9 and MIWI, known MVH interactors. Thus a large complex of proteins may be required for co-localization of GASZ with MILI and its support of MILI function in retrotransposon control. The inability to co-immunoprecipitate GASZ and MILI may suggest that MILI is more weakly ''linked'' to GASZ in this complex.
Most of the nuage protein mutants that block in meiotic prophase have defects in repeat-associated piRNAs. Nuage protein knockouts cause two types of spermatogenic defects -those that block during meiotic prophase (including MVH, MILI, MIWI2 and MAEL) and those that block during haploid differentiation (including DDX25, MIWI, TDRD1, and TDRD6). In the latter class, Tdrd1 2/2 and Miwi 2/2 testes do not have altered repeatassociated piRNAs, both of which block at the spermatid stage and do not appear to have defects in stem cell maintenance. Nearly all of the former class possesses some defect in piRNA biosynthesis, but repeat-associated piRNAs are not altered in all mutants of this class. Like GASZ, disruption of MILI and MIWI2 result in an absence of repeat-associated piRNAs and a meiotic block prior to the loss of all germ cells from seminiferous tubules by 6 months of age [6, 11, 38] . The Mael 2/2 testis phenotype is unique in showing isolated pachytene piRNA defects but blocking during meiotic prophase with elevated retrotransposons [46] . An important gap in our knowledge is whether Mvh 1098/1098 testes display repeatassociated piRNA defects and elevated retrotransposons similar to vasa mutants in Drosophila [55] and the majority of piRNA pathway mutants blocking during meiotic prophase.
Germ cell apoptosis in Gasz null mice may depend upon retrotransposon expression combined with meiotic defects, representing distinct MILI-dependent functions. The GAG, POL, and PRT proteins are all required for efficient retrotransposition of IAP [56] , but their individual contribution to cellular toxicity has not been described. Line L1 proteins are toxic to cells by several mechanisms including activation of BAX and caspase 3 [57] . Expression of the reverse transcriptase of ORF2 alone causes cellular pathology in cell lines and could inhibit completion of meiotic recombination in nuage protein knockouts through its ability to bind random breaks in DNA [58, 59] . Alternatively, the cause of apoptosis in Gasz 2/2 spermatocytes and nuage knockouts in the meiotic class may be retrotransposon-independent. Two observations suggest MILI regulates meiosis independent of retrotransposons. TDRD1, by preventing the processing of mRNAs into piRNAs, confers specificity in non-repeat piRNA generation by MILI [48] . Line L1 dysregulation in the Tdrd1 2/2 mutant must depend upon the decreased mRNAs or increased unannotated RNAs that results from the shift of the substrate RNA used by MILI to generate piRNAs. Since TDRD1 deficient testes do not block during meiotic prophase despite elevated Line L1 expression, spermatocyte death is unlikely to be due to isolated retrotransposon dysfunction. Missense mutants of the zebrafish MILI ortholog ZILI have isolated meiotic defects but no alterations in retrotransposon expression [43] , indicating MILI's contribution to meiosis and retrotransposon control are separable. Knockout models suggest that homologous chromosome synapsis depends upon functional MILI [11, 38] , MIWI2 [7, 11] and MAEL [46] . Mvh null testes block at the zygotene-pachytene transition but their ability to complete synapsis has not been assessed [45] . Therefore, the apoptotic loss of Gasz 2/2 spermatocytes may not result from retrotransposon-induced DNA damage alone, but could also result from failed MILI-dependent meiotic functions including homologous chromosome synapsis or meiotic recombination. MILI has been proposed to cause general effects on germ cell mRNA translation not limited to control of retrotransposon mRNAs [37] . It is possible that this aspect of MILI function might contribute to the reduction of nuage protein levels in Gasz null testes. Translational control of mRNAs necessary for meiotic prophase by MILI may indirectly affect retrotransposon promoter methylation or post-transcriptional processing of retrotransposon mRNAs in addition to MILI's actions mediated by repeatassociated piRNAs.
The piRNA pathway in mammals is specialized to support male germ cell development. Zebrafish and Drosophila share the requirement for PIWI family-dependent piRNA production for fertility of both sexes [42] [43] [44] ; whereas, it is required only for male fertility in the mouse. GASZ is not correlated with this shift because GASZ orthologs are present in many vertebrates including zebrafish [50] . In the mammalian male germline, GASZ supports piRNA biosynthesis required for initiation of retrotransposon repression during the embryonic period and maintenance during meiotic prophase when alterations to chromatin and transcriptional increase would otherwise be favorable toward their expression. GASZ is the first mammalian germline-and intermitochondrial cement-specific protein lacking domains for RNA modification which impacts piRNA processing by localizing or stabilizing multiple proteins in the nuage including PIWI family members.

We electroporated the linearized Gasz targeting vector ( Figure  S1A ) into the HPRT-negative AB2.2 ES cell line; selected clones in hypoxanthine, aminopterine, thymidine, and 1-(2 -deoxy-2 fluoro-D-arabinofuranosyl)-5-iodouracil; and screened the ES cell DNA by Southern blot as described [60] to identify the mutant Gasz allele, Gasz tm1Zuk (herein called Gasz 2 ). Correctly targeted clones were identified by using 59 and 39 probes as shown. Targeted ES cell clones were injected into blastocysts to produce chimeric male mice [61] , which were bred to produce C57BL6/ J6129 hybrid F1 Gasz 2/2 offspring. Ten homozygous mutant and heterozygous sires were bred with WT females over a 6-month mating period. Similar mating trials were performed with homozygous mutant and heterozygous dams. Except for testis defects, Gasz 2/2 mice were grossly indistinguishable from their littermates and lived to become adults.
Full-length His-tagged GASZ was injected into guinea pigs to produce polyclonal antibodies (Cocalico Biologicals, Reamstown, PA). Membranes with 20 or 50 mg of total testis lysate per lane were probed with guinea pig anti-GASZ (1:1000), rabbit anti-IAP GAG (1:1000), rabbit anti-TDRD1 (1:1000), rabbit anti-TDRD6 (1:1000), rabbit anti-TDRD7 (1:500), rabbit anti-MVH (1:500), rabbit anti-MAELSTROM (1:250 Abcam ab28661), or rabbit anti-MILI (1:250 Abcam ab36764) polyclonal antibodies. After developing, the membrane was stripped and re-probed with antib-actin clone AC-15 (Sigma) at 1:5,000. Secondary anti-guinea pig and anti-mouse horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA) were used at 1:10,000.
Testes were fixed in Bouin's fixative (for histology), 4% paraformaldehyde (immunofluorescence) or 4% paraformaldehyde/6.6% acetic acid (for immunohistochemistry), and embedded in paraffin. Antigen retrieval was performed on 5 mm sections by boiling for 20 minutes in citrate buffer pH 6.0. Samples for immunofluorescence were incubated with rabbit anti-cH2AX (1:5,000; 05-636 Upstate, now Millipore, Billerica, MA), guinea pig anti-GASZ (1:300), rabbit anti-MVH (1:500), rabbit anti-TDRD1 (1:100), rabbit anti-MILI (1:500), rabbit anti-IAP GAG (1:500), rabbit anti-ORF1 (1:500), and mouse anti-cytochrome c (1:300, 556433 BD Biosciences San Jose, CA). Alexa594-conjugated anti-guinea pig, Alexa488-conjugated anti-rabbit, and Alexa488-conjugated anti-mouse antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch) were used at 1:500. Sections were mounted with Vectashield mounting medium with DAPI or propidium iodide (Vector Laboratories). Representative images for immunofluorescence were selected and captured on a Zeiss Axiovert s100 2TV. When required, deconvolution was performed with softWoRx v3.3.6 (Applied Precision, Issaquah, WA).
One mg of testicular lysates from WT mice were prepared with 0.5% NP-40 lysis buffer as described previously [62] . Pre-cleared lysates were incubated overnight at 4uC with anti-GASZ, anti-MIWI, or no primary antibody, followed by incubation with protein G beads in 5% BSA to precipitate immune complexes. Coimmunoprecipitating proteins were detected by western blotting with anti-MVH (1:500; ab13840 Abcam Inc, Cambridge, MA), anti-MIWI (1:1000), anti-TDRD1 (1:1000), anti-MVH (1:500; Abcam Cambridge, MA), anti-GASZ (1:500), or b actin as above. Secondary antibodies used were horseradish peroxidase-labeled donkey anti-rabbit, goat anti-mouse, or goat anti-guinea pig (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA). Ten mg of WT and age-matched Gasz 2/2 lysates were used as loading controls.
To evaluate meiotic progression, slides were incubated with guinea pig anti-GASZ (1:500), rabbit anti-SYCP3 (1:500), or rabbit anti-H1.T (1:1000). Staining was visualized using biotinylated goat anti-rabbit or goat anti-mouse secondary antibodies at 1:200 and the Vectastain ABC Kit according to the manufacturer (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). TUNEL analysis was performed with three sections from five mice of each genotype for 10-, 21-day-old and 6-week-old mice by using the Chemicon ApopTag Fluorescein In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit (S7110). Representative images were captured on a Ziess Axioskop (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Thornwood, NY).
Yeast two-hybrid screening was performed by using CLON-TECH Matchmaker Two-Hybrid Library Construction & Screening Kit. A yeast cDNA library was constructed from 17-day-old mouse testis cDNA. Full-length mouse Gasz cDNA, was subcloned into pGBKT7 vector, and was used as the bait construct for screening a yeast cDNA library constructed from 17-day-old mouse testis cDNA. After yeast mating, clones that grew on (SD Leu-Trp-Ade-His-X-a-Gal) selection plates were isolated, and candidate pGADT7-Rec-cDNAs were sequenced. Interactions were confirmed by mating mouse Gasz bait with prey constructs.
To analyze how GASZ interacts with itself and other interacting proteins we generated prey constructs, by using pGADT7, expressing full-length GASZ, MILI, MIWI, and MVH constructs, as well as a RANBP9 construct lacking its proline-rich amino terminus (aa 1-50). Using the CLONTECH Matchmaker BioSensor Kit All constructs were confirmed by DNA sequencing. We made the mating culture by using full-length mouse Gasz bait mated with the prey constructs. Protein-protein interactions were quantified from the resultant fluorescent signal of an equal number of mated cells on a 96 well oxygen biosensor plate post culture for 24 hours using the CLONTECH Matchmaker BioSensor Kit. We added an equal number of mated cells to a 96 well oxygen biosensor plate, cultured the cells at 30uC for 24 hours, and quantified the resultant fluorescent signal.
Using the Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase Kit (Invitrogen, Rockville, MD) cDNA was synthesized from total mouse testis RNA from mice on embryonic day 18.5 and postnatal days 0, 7, and 14 primed with random hexamers following treatment with Turbo DNA-free (Ambion, Austin, TX). Gasz was PCR amplified using ACCGGTCCTCTCAGAAATTAAAA (forward, 111-133 of NM_023729.2) and ATTGGCGTCATAAGTCTCCTACA (reverse, 455-477 of NM_023729.2) primers. QPCR was performed in duplicate with primers specific to IAP and LINE1 [7] on six 14-day-old animals of each genotype using SYBR Green PCR Master Mix on a 7500 Real Time PCR System machine (Applied Biosystems). Nuage protein mRNAs were similarly quantified using primers designed in Primer Express (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) with the exception of those for Mvh [63] and are described in Table S1 . Relative quantification was performed using Actb or Gapdh as appropriate. Cycle conditions were as follows: one cycle at 50uC for 2 min, followed by 1 cycle at 95uC for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles at 95uC for 15 s and 60uC for 1 min. The relative amount of transcripts was calculated by the DDCT method. SEM was calculated for the duplicate measurements, and the relative amount of target gene transcripts was plotted. Significance was determined using Student t-test.
Testes were removed from newborn mice and drop fixed in a modified Karnovsky's mixture of 2.5% glutaraldehyde, 2% paraformaldehyde plus 2 mM CaCl 2 in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer pH 7.4 overnight at 4uC. After primary fixation, the tissue was rinsed 3 times for 5 minutes in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer pH 7.4. The tissue was then post-fixed in 1% OsO 4 in pH 7.4. The tissue was dehydrated in a gradient series from 30% to 100% ethanol. After ethanol dehydration, the tissue was given 3 changes of fresh propylene oxide for 20 minutes each. The tissue was infiltrated up to 1:1 propylene oxide plus Spurr's Low Viscosity embedding resin. The tissue was placed in individual 00 BEEM capsules and polymerized at 70uC overnight. Thick sections were cut with a HistoDiatome knife on an RCM MT-6000XL ultra-microtome, stained with toluidine blue and examined on a light microscope for orientation. Thin sections were cut at 80 nm using a Diatome Ultra knife on the same ultra-microtome and picked up on 200 mesh copper grids. Thin sections were stained for 15 minutes in a saturated aqueous solution of uranyl acetate, counterstained for 6 minutes with Reynold's lead citrate and examined on a Hitachi H7500 transmission electron microscope. Digital images were captured using Gatan Digital Micrograph software and a Gatan US1000 camera.
Total testicular genomic DNA was recovered from 3 pooled 14-day-old mice by phenol:chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation. Aliquots of DNA were denatured for 15 minutes at 50uC in 0.3 M NaOH and bisulfite treatment was performed as described in [64] . Briefly, samples were incubated at 50uC overnight with sodium metabisulfite and hydroxyquinone and purified using a modified procedure for a Viral RNA Miniprep kit (Qiagen). Samples were desulfonated in NaOH for 15 minutes, neutralized with HCl, and purified as before. PCRs were performed using Platinum Taq Supermix (Invitrogen) or ExTaq (Takara) using primers described below from [11] to amplify twelve CG dinucleotides in IAP LTR1_Mm ERVK and from [7] to amplify eight CG dinucleotides in L1MD-A2. Each PCR was performed in 4 replicates, which were pooled and purified using a DNA clean-up and concentrator kit (Zymo Research). Amplicons were ligated into pGEM-T Easy vector (Promega) and sequenced. Capital letters in the reference sequences below denote sequences that are complementary to primer binding sites. These do not contain CG dinucleotides, and all cytosine residues are expected to convert during bisulfite treatment. Fifteen mg of total RNA from WT and Gasz 2/2 mouse testes were gel-fractionated to isolate 18-40 nt small RNAs, followed by 39 and 59 adapter ligation, and product amplification by RT-PCR as per the small RNA kit (FC-102-1009, Illumina) protocol. Finally, the small RNA library was sequenced using a Solexa/ Illumina GA-1 Genome analyzer. Small RNA sequences were analyzed through a high-throughput computational pipeline. For each sample, all sequence reads were aligned to a reference set of miRNAs (miRNA pipeline) and all currently identified piRNAs. The reads are also mapped to the reference mouse genome (NCBI Build 37, UCSC mm9) using the Pash software package [65, 66] , and uploaded to Genboree platform (www.genboree.com) to identify snoRNAs, scRNAs and repeat-associated small RNAs. We performed a local Smith-Waterman alignment of each unique sequence read against each of the mature microRNAs in miRBase version 11.0, allowing for a 3 base overhang on the 59 end and a 6 base overhang on the 39 end. The alignments were scored such that a matching or overhanging base counts as 2 points and mismatches as 21. Each unique sequence read which achieves a per-base alignment score of 2 (i.e., a perfect match) was associated with each mature microRNA for which it achieved that score. The read counts of all redundantly aligning reads to multiple hairpins in the genome were equally apportioned to each mature microRNA to which they align. For repeat-associated small RNAs, each mapping is associated with LINEs, SINEs, DNA and RNA repeat subtypes. Reads were also mapped to consensus mouse and mammalian repeats from Repbase [67] , and rasiRNAs [11] using Blat [68] with a sensitive setting only requiring one 8mer seed filtered such that$90% of the reads mapped. All sequences corresponding to repeat-associated piRNAs and putative novel piRNAs have been deposited at piRNABank (http:// pirnabank.ibab.ac.in/) [69] .
Figure S1 testes from 12-day-old mice. H1.T is a testis-specific histone H1 expressed at low levels in early spermatocytes, peaking in late pachytene spermatocytes, and continued expression in round spermatids [71] . While numerous H1.T-positive spermatocytes were detected in Gasz +/2 testes, few H1.T-positive cells were observed in Gasz 2/2 testes composed of predominantly early spermatocytes and rare atypical ''pachytene'' spermatocytes. (E-J) TUNEL analysis was performed on the Gasz +/2 and Gasz 2/2 testes. In Gasz +/2 testes, TUNEL-positive germ cells were rare, predominantly affecting spermatogonia with the exception of 21-day-old testes when there is a normal developmental peak in germ cell apoptosis [72] . In Gasz 2/2 testes at postnatal days 10 and 21 and in the adult, there is enhanced germ cell apoptosis. By their size, location, and abundance, the most dying cells appear to be spermatocytes. Consistent with pachytene spermatocyte loss being restricted to the stages I-VI of the cycle of the seminiferous epithelium ( Figure S5 ), after 14 days of age we observed more inter-tubule variation including tubules lacking TUNEL positive cells. testes. The average number of reads for piRNAs from two Gasz 2/2 (KO) and control testes from postnatal day 7, 10, and 14 (P7, P10, and P14) mice are shown along with their percentage of the total reads from each testis. All piRNAs that were absent or reduced greater than three-fold in Gasz 2/2 from controls are highlighted in gray. piRNAs with greater abundance on D7 and D14 were analyzed separately. piRNA ID is the accession assigned by piRNABank (http://pirnabank.ibab.in) followed by the Genbank accession. The fold-change represents the degree of reduction in Gasz 2/2 from controls and was calculated for age-matched samples. testes were compared to the map positions (UCSC mm9) of mouse pre-miRNAs. The majority of overlapping sequences mapped to a large microRNA cluster on the X chromosome. The ''piRNA'' reads observed and the similar pre-miRNA with mature miRNA sequences in bold are provided. Most of the sequences are identical with mature miRNAs or differ by 1-2 nt at the 39 end. We also observed several piRNAs mapping to the strand of the stem-loop opposite to known miRNAs to which we assigned putative designations. Novel testis piRNA t27 is described in [74] . Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000635.s014 (0.03 MB XLS) Table S4 A subset of repeat-associated small RNAs are reduced in Gasz 2/2 testes. The average number of individual small RNAs from two Gasz 2/2 (KO) and control testes from postnatal day 7 (P7), 10 (P10), and 14 (P14) mice that mapped with greater than 90% identity to individual repeat consensuses are shown along with their percentage of the total reads from each testis. Each repeat is classified according to a class of repeats (LINE, SINE, LTR) and families within that class. The fold reduction of piRNAs in the Gasz 2/2 as compared to controls is shown with those elements reduced 10-fold highlighted in gray. Among those repeats displaying the most dramatic sustained reduction in Gasz null mice included LTRs (LTR45, MER72B, MER87, RLTR10, LTR75, LTR90B, MT2_Mm, MamGyp-Int, MT-Int, MTB-Int, ORR1A0, ORR1A-Int, ORR1A1, and several IAPs) and LINE L1s (L1MD_A, L1Md_F3, L1Md_Gf, Lx2A1). SINE-associated small RNAs, processed by Dicer, are mostly unaffected in Gasz 
RESULTS-V5 treatment upregulated expression of anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and XIAP (X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein) by more than 3-and 11-fold and downregulated expression of apoptosis-inducing proteins Bax, Bad, and nuclear factor-B-p65 by 10, 30, and nearly 50%, respectively. Treatment improved the recovered islet mass following collagenase digestion and isolation by 44% and in vitro glucose-responsive insulin secretion nearly fourfold. Following transplantation in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice, 150 V5-treated islet equivalents functioned as well as 450 control untreated islet equivalents in normalizing blood glucose.
ptosis by V5 significantly improves islet function following isolation and improves islet graft function following transplantation. Use of this reagent in clinical islet transplantation could have a dramatic impact on the number of patients that might benefit from this therapy and could affect long-term graft survival. Diabetes 56:1259-1267, 2007 P ancreatic islet transplantation holds great promise as a treatment for type 1 diabetes. Insulin independence has been accomplished using a glucocorticoid-free immunosuppression regimen but often requires transplantation of islets from two to four donors (1) (2) (3) . Since there is a considerable shortage of pancreas donors suitable for islet isolation, relatively few diabetic patients have benefited from this form of therapy. More effective recovery of islets from donor pancreata would dramatically increase the number of patients that could be treated by islet transplantation and could improve long-term graft survival (4 -6) .
Following transplantation, islets undergo apoptosis and necrosis from transient local hypoxia, a lack of nutrient support (7, 8) , and hyperglycemia-induced toxicity (9, 10) . While use of fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) at the time of transplantation improves revascularization of islet grafts and facilitates their engraftment (11) , this approach addresses only part of the problem. Collagenase digestion of the pancreas has been shown to induce apoptosis of isolated islets from anoikis and loss of cell-matrix interactions (12, 13) . In addition, islets express proinflammatory nuclear factor-B (NF-B)-dependent genes after isolation, amplifying apoptosis signaling and potentially inducing immunological rejection (14 -16) . Optimization of the isolation process to reduce islet stress has failed to improve recovery, leaving uncontrolled apoptosis as the main cause of poor islet yield (3, 13, 17) .
Investigators have attempted to prevent ␤-cell apoptosis by transferring antiapoptosis molecules (A20, Bcl-2, the I␤ [inhibitor of ␤] repressor, and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein [XIAP] ) and growth factors (hepatocyte and vascular endothelial) into islet grafts (18 -27) . In most cases, these genes have been delivered by recombinant adenovirus. This approach, however, is not without potential risk (28) . Use of IGF-II (29) , leptin (30) , and 17 ␤-estradiol (31) has improved islet mass recovery and viability but has not affected the number of islets that are needed following transplantation to correct diabetes in mice. The caspase-3 inhibitor Z-DEVD-fmk (32) improves islet recovery and viability but inhibits only caspase-3. Whereas these methods have helped reduce apoptosis during islet isolation, few methods have been developed to reduce apoptosis after islet transplantation.
We examined the efficacy of the cell-permeable pentapeptide apoptosis inhibitor V5, which inhibits a wide range of caspases, on improving pancreatic islet recovery. This molecule binds Bax and prevents mitochondrial cytochrome c translocation (33) , resulting in global inhibition of caspases through activation of NF-B-dependent and BH1-4 genes (14, 15, 22) . In this study, we demonstrate that culture of isolated islets with V5 improved islet recovery and their capacity for glucose-responsive insulin secretion. Use of FGF-2 and V5 decreased the number of islets needed to correct diabetes following transplantation threefold and allowed routine correction of glucose homeostasis in mice using islets from a single donor.
Peptide synthesis and preparation. Synthesis of a V5 was carried out at Sigma Genosis (Ishikari, Japan). The purity of the material was 98.8%, and the total amount of the product was 48.9 mg. Dried peptide powders were stored at Ϫ80°C and dissolved in fresh pure water for the experiments. Islet isolation and culture. Male inbred Balb/C mice, 20 g and 10 -12 weeks old, were used as pancreas donors. All the experiments performed were approved by the institutional ethical committee and were conducted according to its guidelines. Mouse islet isolation was performed with Hank's balanced salt solution (HBSS) (GibcoBRL, Grand island, NY), containing 2 mg/ml type-V collagenase (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), 2 mg/ml soybean trypsin inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.2% BSA (Sigma-Aldrich), using a modified Gotoh's method with Histopaque 1077-RPMI 1640 medium gradient (Sigma-Aldrich).
Islets were handpicked up under a microscope and cultured with RPMI-1640 (GibcoBRL) at 37°C and 5% CO 2 for in vitro analyses. Freshly isolated islets were used immediately for transplantation experiments. Islet viability was evaluated using a Live & Dead detection kit (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Purity of islets was assessed by dithizone staining, and islet equivalents' yield was determined using a phase-contrast microscopy with a squared calibrated grid. One islet equivalent was equal to a spherical islet of 150 m in diameter. ATP content of islets, directly after isolation and following 24 h of culture, was measured at SRL (Tokyo, Japan) using 500 islet-equivalent aliquots per experiment in three separate studies. Measurement of mitochondrial activity of islets. Islets of 50 islet equivalents were cultured for 24 h with or without 100 mol/l V5 in each well of six-well plates (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), and mitochondrial dehydrogenases activity of islets were comparatively measured using 0.5 mg/ml of MTT (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide) (MTT reagent; Sigma). Freshly isolated islets were used as a positive control (34) . Three independent experiments were performed. Detection of apoptosis of islets by annexin-V expression. Expression of annexin-V was measured in islets treated with or without 100 mol/l V5 at 24 h of culture. Islets were washed twice with HBSS and dispersed to a single cell by gentle pipeting in trypsin-EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich). Single islet cells were washed twice with HBSS containing 10% newborn calf serum (Sigma-Aldrich) and labeled with an annexin V-enhanced green fluorescent protein apoptosis detection kit (MBL, Nagoya, Japan), according to the manufacturer's instructions, and analyzed by a MoFlo cell sorter (Dako-Cytomation, Tokyo, Japan). Apoptotic cells were identified by the fluorescence of enhanced green fluorescent protein. Freshly isolated islets were used as a control (3) . Three independent experiments were performed. Power blot analysis for apoptosis-associated molecules. Islets (1,000 islet equivalents) were cultured with RPMI-1640-S with or without V5 (100 mol/l) for 24 h. Then, islets were washed with HBSS twice, rinsed with ice-cold lysis buffer of PBS containing 1.0% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich), sonicated for 30 s, and placed on ice for 10 min. Lysates were centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C to exclude cellular debris. Protein concentrates were collected and analyzed for 50 apoptosis-associated molecules according to the manufacture's protocol (Clonotech, Tokyo, Japan). Three independent experiments were performed.
Measurement of insulin secretion, insulin content, and stimulation index of islets. Islets (10 islet equivalents/well of six-well plates) were cultured in RPMI-1640-S supplemented with or without V5 (100 mol/l) in both standard and ultralow attachment plates (BD Bioscience, Tokyo, Japan). Islets were treated for 20 min in 2 ml of Krebs-Ringer balanced buffer (KRBB) (containing 143.0 mmol/l Na, 5.8 mmol/l K, 2.5 mmol/l Ca, 1.2 mmol/l Mg 2 , 124.1 mmol/l Cl, 1.2 mmol/l PO-4, 1.2 mmol/l SO-4, 25 mmol/l HCO-3, 10 mmol/l HEPES, 0.2% BSA, and 3.3 or 25 mmol/l glucose) at pH 7.4 for RPMI-1640-S equilibration. Insulin secretion of the islets was measured under static incubation using a Mercodia mouse insulin enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit (Uppsala, Sweden) at 0, 24, 72, 120, and 168 h, as previously reported (35, 36) . Briefly, islets were first incubated at 37°C and 5% CO 2 for 2 h in KRBB with 3.3 mmol/l glucose, then in KRBB with 25 mmol/l glucose for 2 h, and finally in KRBB with 3.3 mmol/l glucose. Amount of insulin content of islets was measured at the end of static incubation. Three independent experiments were performed. Transplantation experiments. Female inbred Balb/C mice, 20 g and 10 weeks old, received a single intraperitoneal injection of 220 mg streptozotocin per kg body wt. Mice with blood glucose levels Ͼ360 mg/dl on a minimum of two consecutive measurements were selected as recipients (34) . Gelatinized microspheres for islet transplantation (30 -50 m in size) containing both FGF-2 (100 ng) and V5 (100 mol/l) or FGF-2 (100 ng) only were prepared through glutaraldehyde cross-linking of an aqueous gelatin solution, as previously reported (37) . For transplantation, freshly isolated islets were suspended in 10 l RMPI-1640-S medium, embedded with the gelatinized microspheres, and then transplanted under the kidney capsule of diabetic mice.
Diabetic mice were divided into the following four groups: 1) n ϭ 21, transplantation with 150 islet equivalents obtained from one mouse prepared with FGF-2 only; 2) n ϭ 21, transplantation with 150 islet equivalents obtained from one mouse prepared with both FGF-2 and V5; 3) n ϭ 21, transplantation with 450 islet equivalents obtained from three mice prepared with FGF-2 only; and 4) n ϭ 5, animals received no islet transplants. Normal healthy mice were used as a positive control (group 5; n ϭ 5). In vivo evaluation after islet transplantation in diabetic mice. Blood glucose levels were monitored at regular intervals for 27 weeks. Normoglycemia was defined to be Ͻ126 mg/dl in at least two consecutive measurements. An intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test was performed at 24 weeks. Mice were fasted overnight and then glucose (1g/kg body wt) was injected intraperitoneally, as previously described (34) . Nephrectomy was performed at 26 weeks in the mice of groups 1, 2, and 3, and total insulin content of the samples was measured per microgram graft (34) . Histological studies of kidneys bearing islet grafts. Kidneys bearing islet grafts were removed at 3 days and at 26 weeks after transplantation (n ϭ 3 from groups 1, 2, and 3), fixed in 10% formalin for 24 h, and embedded in paraffin for hematoxylin-eosin staining, insulin staining, and transferasemediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) staining. Serial-matched paraffin sections were used for these stainings. Polyclonal anti-insulin guinea pig primary antibodies (Dakocytomation) were applied. Then, secondary antibody phycoethrin-labeled anti-guinea pig (Amersham Biosciences) was added. Green fluorescent nuclear counterstaining was used for all the samples. Immunofluorescent stained slides were observed under a confocal laser-scanning microscope (LSM510; Carl Zeiss) (34) . An in situ cell death detection tetramethylrhodamine red kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) was used for TUNEL staining. PCR analysis. For detection of inflammatory molecules, total RNA was extracted from kidneys bearing islet grafts 2 days after transplantation using RNA Trizol (Invitrogen), as previously reported (38) . RT-PCR was performed at 22°C for 10 min and then at 42°C for 20 min using 1.0 g RNA per reaction to ensure that the amount of cDNA amplified was proportional to the mRNA present in the original samples. The following specific primers were used: interleukin (IL)-1␤ (NM_008361), 5Ј-caggcaggcagtatcactca-3Ј forward and 5Ј-agctcatatgggtccgacag-3Ј reverse; tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-␣ (NM_01369), 5Ј-agtccgggcaggtctacttt-3Ј forward and 5Ј-ggtcactgtcccagcatctt-3Ј reverse; Bcl-2 (NM_009741), 5Ј-aggagcaggtgcctacaaga-3Ј forward and 5Ј-gcattttcccaccactgtct-3Ј reverse; and GAPDH (NM_008084) 5Ј-acccagaagactgtggatgg-3Ј forward and 5Ј-cacattgggggtaggaacac-3Ј reverse. Immunoelectron microscopic examination of kidneys bearing islet grafts. At 26 weeks, kidneys bearing islet grafts were harvested (n ϭ 3 each from groups 1, 2, and 3) and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.1% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 mol/l phosphate buffer at pH 7.4. Samples were embedded in LR White (London Resin, London, U.K.). Ultrathin sections on nickel grids were incubated with 6 mol/l urea in 0.1 mol/l glycine-HCl buffer (pH 3.5) for 5 min to etch the surface of sections. The grids were incubated with polyclonal anti-insulin-guinea pig primary antibodies (DakoCytomation) at 4°C overnight. After washing, the grids were incubated for 1.5 h with 10 nm colloidal gold-conjugated goat anti-guinea pig IgG (British Biocell Interna-
tional). The grids were washed, postfixed with 2% glutaraldehyde, rinsed with ddH2O, and dried. The sections were stained with 2% uranyl acetate for 15 min and 3% lead citrate for 1 min and observed with a Hitachi H-7100 transmission electron microscope (35) . Statistical analysis. Results were expressed as means Ϯ SE. For comparisons between two groups, the paired or unpaired Student's t test (two tailed) was used. For multiple comparisons, the one-way ANOVA was used. KaplanMeier method was used to calculate the survival data. A P value Ͻ0.05 was considered significant when determined by the Mann-Whitney U test.
Effect of treatment with V5 on islet viability and function, as well as parameters associated with apoptosis in vitro. Pancreatic islet yield following isolation was 152.5 Ϯ 3.46 islet equivalents per mouse. Islet viability immediately after isolation, and 12 and 24 h later in control culture, was 99.1 Ϯ 0.7%, 81.0 Ϯ 1.2%, and 72.0 Ϯ 0.9%, respectively, whereas viability at the same time points after culture in the presence of 100 mol/l V5 was 98.9 Ϯ 0.6%, 95.4 Ϯ 0.8%, and 93.5 Ϯ 0.6%. To assess the effect of V5 on islets recovered under clinically relevant donor recovery conditions, we also evaluated the effect of V5 on mouse islets isolated in association with 12 h of cold ischemia and 30 min of warm ischemia. We found that V5 was effective in protecting mouse islets under these conditions (Table 1) . Since apoptosis is often reflected in mitochondrial function, we assessed mitochondrial dehydrogenase activity 24 h after isolation. As shown in Fig. 1A , mitochondrial dehydrogenase activity was significantly greater in V5-treated islets (96.4 Ϯ 1.5%) than that in control untreated islets (54.0 Ϯ 5.7%). We also measured the expression of annexin-V, an early marker of apoptosis, 24 h after isolation. V5-treated islets expressed significantly less annexin-V (14.0%) than control untreated islets (58.5%) (Fig. 1B-D) . A power blot was then performed to identify proteins significantly (more than twofold) altered in isolated islets after treatment for 24 h in V5. Power blot analysis screened over 50 proteins associated with apoptosis (Fig. 1E) . Western blot analysis showed a 0.11-fold reduction in the expression of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax, a 0.34-fold reduction in Bad, and a 0.46-fold reduction in NF-B-p65. Treatment of islets with V5 also generated an 11.76-fold upregulation in XIAP and a 3.31-fold increase in Bcl-2 expression (Fig. 1E and F) .
To further investigate the effect of V5 on recovered islets, we analyzed glucose-responsive insulin secretion, or insulin secretion index, immediately after isolation and 24, 72, 120, and 168 h later. Since islets adherent to culture plates lose function quickly, analysis was performed on islets under both adherent and nonadherent conditions. V5-treated islets had a 2.7-to 3.7-fold higher insulin secretion index than control untreated islets at all time points under both adherent and nonadherent conditions ( Fig. 2A and B) , and V5-treated islets maintained their insulin content (128 Ϯ 1 at 24 h and 76 Ϯ 6 at 168 h under adherent culture conditions; 128 Ϯ 3 at 24 h and 101 Ϯ 5 at 168 h under nonadherent culture conditions) significantly better than untreated control islets (116 Ϯ 5 at 24 h and 9 Ϯ 2 at 168 h under adherent culture conditions; 117 Ϯ 4 at 24 h and 80 Ϯ 4 at 168 h under nonadherent culture conditions) (Fig. 2C and D) , respectively.
To investigate the effect of V5 treatment on recovered islets after transplantation, we transplanted V5-treated and control untreated islets into streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. Transplantation procedures induce a meaningful grade of apoptosis, dramatically reducing the islet engraftment capacities and its survival by induction of the inflammatory reactions. We examined the potential prevention of apoptosis in vivo by microspheres containing V5 and FGF-2 within the islets grafts, 3 days after transplantation, by insulin staining and TUNEL assay. We found that the number of insulin-positive cells was significantly maintained by V5 treatment (150 control untreated islet equivalents: 51 Ϯ 9 cells/high power field vs. 150 V5-treated islet equivalents: 202 Ϯ 23 cells/high power field; Fig. 3A-F and J) . Notably, a significantly larger number of TUNEL-positive cells were observed in control untreated islet grafts than found in V5-treated islets (Fig. 3G-I and K). V5 treatment significantly reduced inflammatory molecule IL-1␤ and TNF-␣ gene expression and enhanced Bcl-2 gene expression in islet grafts (Fig. 3) .
In consistency with this, following transplantation of 150 V5-treated islet equivalents (recovered from one donor), normoglycemia was achieved in all diabetic recipients within 12 days and 100% 6-month survival obtained ( Fig. 4A and B) . In contrast, transplantation of 150 control untreated islet equivalents (recovered from one donor) failed to tightly control blood glucose levels, and 60% of diabetic recipients died 6 months after transplantation. Transplantation of 450 control untreated islet equivalents (recovered from three donors) corrected hyperglycemia to the same degree as transplantation of 150 V5-treated islet equivalents and produced a similar degree of blood glucose control to that after transplantation of 150 V5-treated islet equivalents following glucose challenge (Fig. 4C) . Removal of kidneys bearing islet grafts 26 weeks after transplantation produced hyperglycemia in all transplanted mice, indicating that the islet grafts were responsible for correction of diabetes. Histological analysis of V5-treated islet grafts showed a comparatively equal amount of both total insulin content (16.1 Ϯ 0.4 g/graft), compared with those (16.7 Ϯ 1.4 g/graft) of V5-untreated 450 islet equivalents (Fig. 4D) , and size of the functional islet grafts (Fig. 5B, C, E, and F) . Insulin immunoelectron microscopy 26 weeks after transplantation showed ␤-cells with numerous secretory granules and well-preserved ultrastructure organelles following V5-treatment (Fig. 5H  and J) , whereas control untreated islet grafts showed fewer ␤-cells, each containing fewer insulin secretory granules and organelles ( Fig. 5G and J) .
Type 1 diabetes results from the loss of insulin-producing pancreatic ␤-cells by ␤-cell-specific autoimmune responses. Pancreatic islet transplantation is one possible method for the cure of diabetes; however, the shortage of human donor pancreata limits the widespread application of this procedure (1, 5, 6) . Because a relatively large ␤-cell mass from two to four donor pancreata is needed to achieve normoglycemia in the recipient, it is crucial to develop treatments that would reduce loss of transplanted islets due to apoptosis and maximize use of the limited amount of donor tissue. Isolation of human islets is very stressful on the cells as it disrupts cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions and results in islet apoptosis (9, 12, 13, 17, 32, 38, 39) . Alterations in islet fine structure can be seen shortly after isolation and culture in vitro. Prevention of apoptosis has been a target to maintain islet mass for transplantation; for example, overexpression of XIAP (26) or A20 (23) in mouse islets by adenoviral vector-mediated delivery prevented early posttransplant apoptosis and reduced the islet cell mass needed to achieve normoglycemia. Although ex vivo gene transfer procedures using viral vectors are attractive, adenovirally transduced islets should be cultured to eliminate the risk of viral gene transfer to recipients. Thus, it would be beneficial to develop a simple, efficient method to protect islets from apoptosis and reduce the number of islets required for transplantation.
Bax is a member of the Bcl-2 family of proteins and plays a key role in the induction of apoptosis. In response to apoptotic stimuli, Bax translocates from the cytosol to mitochondria and causes release of apoptogenic factors (40) . Inhibition of Bax would be extremely useful in islet culture immediately after isolation procedure. Ku70 plays an important role in DNA double-strand break repair in the nucleus (41) . Ku70 binds Bax in the cytosol and inhibits its translocation into mitochondria (33) . The Bax-binding 
domain of human Ku70 consists of residues 578 -583, and a pentapeptide (i.e.,V5) contained within these residues is cell permeable and suppressed Bax-mediated apoptotic cell death in several types of human cells, including hepatoma Hep3B cells and myeloid 32D (EpoR wt) cells (14) . We previously found that V5 treatment of monkey hepatocyte cultures improved differentiated function and prolonged cell survival (42) . In this study, we investigated the effect of V5 on islet viability and functionality during islet isolation and transplantation into diabetic mice.
First, we examined the effect of V5 on apoptosis of islets in vitro. We found that fluorescein isothyocyanate-labeled V5 (100 mol/l) was uniformly taken up by islet cells within 3 h when added into the culture, and no cytotoxic effects were observed with a dose Յ500 mol/l (data not shown). Treatment of islets isolated from Balb/c mice with V5 peptide significantly increased viability and inhibited apoptosis.
The mitochondrial metabolite, succinate, is a key metabolic mediator of glucose-stimulated preproinsulin gene transcription and translation (43) . Therefore, we examined mitochondrial function in V5-treated islets and found that mitochondrial function was increased by ϳ42% compared with untreated islets. Preservation of mitochondrial function in ␤-cells is critical for preserving their capacity to produce, store, and secrete insulin. V5 treatment significantly enhanced ATP levels in both 12-h cold preserved and 30-min warm preserved islets (Table 1 ) and markedly reduced apoptosis. Consistent with these findings, glucose-responsive insulin secretion was also increased by 2.7-to 3.7-fold in V5-treated islets. Islets treated with V5 maintained the insulin content of freshly isolated islets, even after 1 week of culture. Since islet culture seems to be an important step in the islet transplantation, the use of V5 might constitute an important tool for maintaining more viable islets with enhanced insulin secretion over the conventional cultures, floating better than adherent culture with matrices. Second, we examined the expression of proteins involved in the regulation of apoptosis in V5-treated islets. We found that the expression of pro-apoptotic molecules Bax, Bad, and NF-B was markedly reduced, and the expression of anti-apoptotic molecules XIAP and Bcl-2 was upregulated. XIAP has previously been shown to improve ␤-cell growth, survival, and metabolic function during stress (35, 44, 45) and affects Akt/protein kinase B phosphorylation (36, 45) , modulating Bad, caspase-9, Bcl-2, cyclic AMP-response element-binding 
protein, and insulin receptor substrate-1 downstream. These changes may help to protect V5-treated islets from apoptosis and increase graft survival. The beneficial effects of XIAP have been reported. Overexpression of XIAP markedly enhanced ␤-cell survival and functional recovery of islets in hypoxia-and cytokineinduced injury in vitro (27) . Overexpression of XIAP in human islets reversed the negative effects of immunosuppressive drugs on insulin secretion and cell viability (46) . Recently, it was reported that XIAP overexpression in human islets prevented posttransplant apoptosis and reduced the islet mass required to treat diabetes (26) .
These promising in vitro results suggested that V5 treatment might preserve the islet mass in grafts and thus reduce the number of islets needed to obtain insulin independence. Local hypoxia and lack of nutrients can cause apoptosis in islet transplants (8) . Early vascularization of islet grafts can overcome these problems and facilitate islet engraftment. We have previously found that use of gelatinized microspheres containing slow-release, cross-linked FGF-2 that persists for ϳ2 weeks produced rapid islet revascularization at the site of implantation (37) . In those mouse islet transplantation studies, islet graft function was improved by improved vascularization. However, we also encountered considerable transplantation-associated apoptosis that resulted in loss of islet mass (11) . Therefore, in this study, we transplanted islets embedded in microspheres containing FGF-2, to enhance vascularization, and V5, to reduce apoptosis, and found that apoptosis was decreased and the number of insulinpositive cells was increased in grafts containing islets treated with V5. When we embedded 150 islet equivalents within FGF-2-conjugated microspheres along with V5, diabetes was remitted within 12 days in streptozotocininduced diabetic mice, similar to the results seen in mice transplanted with 450 islet equivalents with FGF-2 only, suggesting that normoglycemia could be achieved with islets from a single donor if V5 is provided. Interestingly, V5 treatment significantly depressed inflammatory molecule IL-1␤ and TNF-␣ gene expression in islet grafts. We found that V5 treatment similarly affected allogenic islets following transplantation in preliminary studies (supplementary Fig. 1 [ available in an online appendix at http:// dx.doi.org/10.2337/db06-1679]). We next plan to explore methods to protect transplanted islets from autoimmune attack and early recurrence of diabetes following allogeneic islet transplantation.
In conclusion, we have shown that treatment of islets with V5 increases islet viability, enhances islet function, and prevents apoptosis. Transplantation of islets along with FGF-2 and V5 allowed a smaller islet mass (singledonor pancreas) to be used for transplantation; normoglycemia was achieved and insulin content and islet function were preserved posttransplantation. Timed release of V5, perhaps by gelatinization, may result in long-term prevention of apoptosis and improve outcomes in human islet transplantation.
Bacterial infection and inflammation of the placental fetal membranes (FM) play a major role in chorioamnionitis, preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) and preterm birth (ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 80, 2007 , Goldenberg et al., 2000 Lamont, 2003; Caughey et al., 2008; Goldenberg et al., 2008) . The FMs are likely the first tissues colonized by an ascending bacterial infection (Herve et al., 2008) . Although most normal term deliveries have evidence of bacteria in the chorioamnion, it is the association with inflammation that correlates with pathology and prematurity (Romero et al., 2007) . An intrauterine infection gaining access to the FMs is thought to trigger prematurity by activating innate immune responses (Romero et al., 2007) . Indeed, clinical and experimental studies have correlated bacteria/bacterial components and inflammation at the maternal-fetal interface with preterm birth (Elovitz and Mrinalini, 2004; Elovitz et al., 2006; Romero et al., 2006; Pettker et al., 2007; Koga et al., 2009; Pirianov et al., 2009; Burd et al., 2010; Cardenas et al., 2011) . However, in spite of this association, no single bacterium has been attributed to preterm birth, and antibiotic interventions have proved unsuccessful (Ganu et al., 2012) .
More recently there has been growing interest in the role of viral infections and adverse pregnancy outcomes. The presence of a number of viral infections in the amniotic fluid or gestational tissues have been reported to be linked to increased risk for chorioamnionitis and spontaneous preterm birth, such as adenovirus (Srinivas et al., 2006; Tsekoura et al., 2010) ; Epstein -Barr virus, cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes virus (Gibson et al., 2008 (Gibson et al., , 2011 , human papillomavirus (Gomez et al., 2008) , coxsackie virus, group B type 1 (Strong and Young, 1995) , the enterovirus herpangia (Chen et al., 2010) and hepatitis virus (Elefsiniotis et al., 2010; Connell et al., 2011) . Infection with adenovirus has also been associated with second trimester pregnancy loss (Srinivas et al., 2006) . Similarly, infection with Parvovirus B19 or herpes virus early in pregnancy has been linked to second trimester miscarriage or very preterm birth (Johansson et al., 2008) . In addition, women with H1N1 are more likely to have adverse pregnancy outcomes such as spontaneous miscarriages and preterm birth (Creanga et al., 2010; Investigators and Australasian Maternity Outcomes Surveillance, 2010; Siston et al., 2010) , and the rate of preterm birth correlates with maternal disease severity (Michaan et al., 2012) .
While FMs are permissive to viral infections, including influenza virus (Uchide et al., 2002a (Uchide et al., , b, 2006 (Uchide et al., , 2009 (Uchide et al., , 2012 , CMV (Figueroa et al., 1978; Kumazaki et al., 2002; Matsunaga et al., 2013) , and herpes virus (Rokos et al., 1998) , and viral infections can trigger an inflammatory cytokine response in the chorioamnion (Uchide et al., 2002b (Uchide et al., , 2006 (Uchide et al., , 2012 , little is known about the mechanisms involved. One way in which infection-associated inflammation at the maternal -fetal interface arises is through activation of the innate immune Toll-like receptors (TLRs) (Abrahams, 2008) . We have previously shown that normal human FMs at term constitutively express TLRs 1-10, as well as the two major TLR adapter proteins, MyD88 and TRIF (Hoang et al., 2014) . Moreover, in response to bacterial agonists, TLR2, TLR4, TLR5 and TLR9 mediate distinct FM cytokine profiles (Hoang et al., 2014) . Thus, we hypothesized that this might also be the case for TLR3, which senses viral dsRNA and TLR8, which detects viral ssRNA (Kumar et al., 2011) . Therefore, the objective of this study was to characterize the cytokine profile and antiviral response in human FMs exposed to the viral signatures, dsRNA and ssRNA, and to determine the mechanisms involved.
Fetal membrane collection, preparation and stimulation FM (n ¼ 16) were collected from uncomplicated normal term pregnancies (39-41 weeks) delivered by elective repeat Cesarean section, without signs of labor, infection or PPROM. No patients received prostaglandins or any other induction agent prior to Cesarean section. Sample collection was approved by Yale University's Human Investigation Committee. After washing the FMs with sterile PBS supplemented with penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 mg/ml) (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA), adherent blood clots were removed and sections where both the chorion and amnion were intact were cut using a 6-mm biopsy punch. The FM explants were then placed in 0.4-mm cell culture inserts (BD Falcon, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA), with 500-ml Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA) and these were placed in a 24-well plate containing 500 ml of the DMEM media for 24 h, as previously described (Luo et al., 2010; Hoang et al., 2014) . The next day the media was removed and replaced with serumfree OptiMeM media (Gibco). FM explants were then treated with: no treatment (NT); the TLR3 agonist and synthetic analog of viral dsRNA, Poly(I:C), at 20 mg/ml (Invivogen, San Diego, CA, USA); or the TLR8 agonist, viral ssRNA at 5 mg/ml (Invivogen). To determine the involvement of caspase-1, FM explants were pretreated for 1 h with the specific caspase-1 inhibitor, Z-WEHD-FMK at 1 mM (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). To determine the involvement of MyD88 or TRIF, FM explants were pretreated for 1 h with either a MyD88 inhibitor peptide (Pepin-MYD; 10 mM); a TRIF inhibitor peptide (Pepin-TRIF; 10 mM) or a control peptide (Pepin-Control; 10 mM) (Invivogen). The optimal Poly(I:C) and viral ssRNA concentrations were determined in preliminary experiments (data not shown) and the time point determined from previous studies (Hoang et al., 2014) . After 24 h of treatment, cell-free culture supernatants were collected and the explants snap frozen. Supernatants and tissues were then stored at 2808C until further analysis was performed.
Cytokine analysis FM supernatants were analyzed for the following cytokines/chemokines using multiplex analysis (BioRad): IL-1b, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12, IL-17, G-CSF (CSF3), GM-CSF (CSF2), IFNg, MCP-1 (CCL2), MIP-1a, MIP-1, b RANTES (CCL5), TNF-a, VEGF and GRO-a as previously described (Luo et al., 2010; Hoang et al., 2014) . FM supernatants were also analyzed for IL-1b by ELISA (R&D Systems).
FM explant biopsies were homogenized and total RNA extracted as previously described Krikun et al., 2013; Hoang et al., 2014) . Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using the KAPA SYBR Fast qPCR kit (Kapa Biosystems, Woburn, MA, USA), and PCR amplification performed on the BioRad CFX Connect Real-time System (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). Detection of human IFNb, 2 ′ ,5 ′ -oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS), myxovirus-resistance A (MxA) and apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme-catalytic polypeptide-like 3G (APOBEC3G) and secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI) was performed using primer sequences as previously described (Krikun et al., 2013) . Data were normalized to the housekeeping gene, GAPDH, analyzed using the D-DCT method and presented as fold change (FC) in the expression of gene of interest relative to the NT control, as previously described Krikun et al., 2013) .
Experiments were performed at least three times and data presented as mean + SEM. Prism from Graphpad Software, Inc. (La Jolla, CA, USA) was used to calculate significance (P , 0.05). Statistical analysis was performed using either the paired t-test, or for multiple comparisons, one-way ANOVA.

In a previous study we established that human FMs from normal term pregnancies constitutively express the viral sensors, TLR3 and TLR8, as well as the TLR adapter proteins MyD88 and TRIF (Hoang et al., 2014) . Therefore, in this study, FMs were treated with the TLR3 agonist, Poly(I:C), and the TLR8 agonist, viral ssRNA (Kumar et al., 2011) . After treatment with Poly(I:C), FMs secreted significantly higher levels of TNF-a (2.1-fold), MIP-1a (8-fold), MIP-1b (4.8-fold), and RANTES (16.4-fold) compared with the NT control. In parallel, FM secretion of IL-2, and VEGF was significantly dampened by 4-fold and 4.1-fold, respectively, after exposure to Poly(I:C) (Fig. 1) . FM secretion of IL-1b, IL-6, G-CSF, MCP-1, GRO-a, IL-8, GM-CSF and IFNg were not significantly changed after Poly(I:C) treatment (Fig. 1) . After treatment with viral ssRNA, FMs secreted significantly higher levels of IL-1b (13.8-fold), IL-2 (1.3-fold), IL-6 (4.1-fold), TNF-a (4.2-fold), MCP-1 (1.9-fold), G-CSF (3.8-fold), MIP-1a (4.8-fold), , RANTES (4.3-fold) and GRO-a (6.6-fold) (Fig. 1) . FM secretion of IL-8, GM-CSF, IFNg and VEGF were not significantly changed after ssRNA treatment (Fig. 1) . Levels of IL-4, IL-10, IL-12 and IL-17 were below the assay's detection limit.
Role of MyD88 and TRIF in viral dsRNA-and ssRNA-induced FM cytokine secretion Having established that human FMs respond to the viral TLR agonists, Poly(I:C) and ssRNA by secreting cytokines and chemokines, we next sought to determine the role of the adapter proteins MyD88 and TRIF. Typically, TLR3 utilizes the adapter protein TRIF (Yamamoto et al., 2002; Oshiumi et al., 2003) , while TLR8 signals through MyD88 (Han et al., 2012; Heil et al., 2004) . As shown in Fig. 2A , the Poly(I:C)-induced up-regulation of FM MIP-1a, MIP-1b and RANTES in the presence of the control peptide was significantly reduced by the presence of the MyD88 inhibitor. The TRIF inhibitor also significantly reduced Poly(I:C)-induced secretion of MIP-1a, but not MIP-1b or RANTES (Fig. 2A) . Neither the MyD88 nor the TRIF inhibitor had any significant effect on the FMs Poly(I:C)-induced TNF-a response ( Fig. 2A) . As shown in Fig. 2B , the ssRNA-induced up-regulation of IL-1b, IL-2, IL-6, G-CSF, MIP-1a, RANTES and GRO-a secretion by the FMs was significantly reduced by both the MyD88 inhibitor and the TRIF inhibitor, when compared with the control peptide. Viral ssRNA-induced up-regulation of MIP-1b secretion by the FMs was significantly inhibited by the presence of the TRIF inhibitor, but not the MyD88 inhibitor (Fig. 2B) . ssRNA-induced TNF-a and MCP-1 secretion was not significantly altered by ether inhibitor (Fig. 2B) .
FM IL-1b secretion in response to viral ssRNA is caspase-1 dependent Since viral ssRNA, but not Poly(I:C), induced the FMs to produce IL-1b, we further examined the mechanism involved. We previously demonstrated that human FMs express the inflammasome components Nalp1, Nalp3, ASC (apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD) and caspase-1 (Hoang et al., 2014) , which mediate the processing of intracellular pro-IL-1b into its active, secreted form (Agostini et al., 2004; Martinon and Tschopp, 2004) . In the presence of a caspase-1 inhibitor, IL-1b secretion induced by viral ssRNA was significantly reduced by 54.7% (Fig. 3) .
Poly(I:C), but not viral ssRNA, induces an FM antiviral response TLR3 and TLR8 activation can induce a type I interferon (IFN) response (Arpaia and Barton, 2011) , and the subsequent production of antiviral factors, such as IFN-inducible OAS, MxA and APOBEC3G (Samuel, 2001; Turelli et al., 2004; Abrahams et al., 2006; Bonvin et al., 2006; Krikun et al., 2013) and SLPI (Schaefer et al., 2005; Abrahams et al., 2006; Krikun et al., 2013) . As shown in Fig. 4 , Poly(I:C), but not ssRNA, significantly induced FMs to express elevated levels of IFNb, Figure 1 Cytokine profile of FM after exposure to Poly(I:C) and viral ssRNA. FM explants were treated with NT, Poly(I:C) or viral ssRNA. Bar charts show levels of IL-1b, IL-2, IL-6, TNFa, MCP-1, G-CSF, MIP-1a, MIP-1b, RANTES, GROa, VEGF, IL-8, GM-CSF and IFNg (*P , 0.05, **P , 0.001; n ¼ 6).
MxA, OAS and APOBEC3G mRNA. In contrast, neither Poly(I:C) nor ssRNA induced a significant increase in SLPI mRNA levels (Fig. 4) .
Infection-associated pregnancy complications such as chorioamnionitis, PPROM and preterm birth have been strongly associated with bacterial infection and inflammation of the FMs (ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 80, 2007 , Goldenberg et al., 2000 Lamont, 2003; Caughey et al., 2008; Goldenberg et al., 2008) . Although, much less is known about the role of viral infections, there is growing evidence to suggest an association with pregnancy mortality and morbidity and gestational tissues including the FMs may be a target (Figueroa et al., 1978; Rokos et al., 1998; Kumazaki et al., 2002; Uchide et al., 2002a Uchide et al., , b, 2006 Uchide et al., , 2009 Uchide et al., , 2012 Matsunaga et al., 2013) . The functional role of innate immune pattern recognition receptors, such as the TLRs and Nod proteins, in response to bacterial components in the FMs has been described (Kim et al., 2004; Adams et al., 2007; Leroy et al., 2007; Abrahams et al., 2013; Lappas, 2013 Lappas, , 2014 Hoang et al., 2014) , however, little is known about this tissue's response to viral components or the mechanisms involved. In this current study we have demonstrated that FMs exposed to the TLR3 agonist, viral dsRNA, and the TLR8 agonist, viral ssRNA, generate distinct cytokine/ chemokine and antiviral profiles. Furthermore, we have demonstrated a differential role for the TLR adapter proteins, MyD88 and TRIF, in mediating FM cytokine/chemokine production in response to these two viral signatures. We have also demonstrated a role for the inflammasome component, caspase-1, in mediating FM IL-1b production following exposure to viral ssRNA.
When we compared the cytokine profile generated by human FMs after exposure to the viral TLR3 and TLR8 agonists, Poly(I:C) and viral ssRNA, respectively, these two viral signatures induced quite different cytokine/chemokine responses. Poly(I:C) up-regulated the secretion of the pro-inflammatory cytokine, TNF-a, and the inflammatory chemokines MIP-1a, MIP-1b and RANTES, while down-regulating the constitutive of IL-2 and VEGF. In contrast viral ssRNA triggered a much broader response by increasing the tissue's section of the pro-inflammatory cytokines, IL-1b, TNF-a, IL-6 and IL-2; the inflammatory chemokines, MCP-1, MIP-1a, MIP-1b, RANTES and GRO-a and the growth factor, G-CSF. So while both viral components triggered distinct profiles, both responses were a combination of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines.
The production of the chemokines, MCP-1, MIP-1a, MIP-1b, RANTES and GRO-a by FMs exposed to viral RNA, suggests that in the context of a viral infection, the chorioamnion may play a role in immune cell recruitment. Although histologic chorioamnionitis is characterized by a neutrophil infiltrate, and the classic chemokine for this, IL-8, is often elevated in these cases , in our studies FMs treated with Poly(I:C) or ssRNA did not produce elevated levels of IL-8. Interestingly, basal IL-8 levels produced by the FMs were much higher than the other chemokines detected. Neutrophil chemotaxis can, however, be regulated by a number of other chemokines. In mice, for example, it has been shown that neutrophils express two major chemokine receptors, CCR1 and CXCR2 (Chou et al., 2010; McDonald and Kubes, 2010) . CCR1 can be ligated by MIP-1a, MIP-1b and RANTES, while CXCR2 can be activated by GRO-a (Chou et al., 2010; McDonald and Kubes, 2010) . Thus, it seems that after TLR3 and TLR8 stimulation, human FMs are producing mostly CCR1 ligands and may recruit neutrophils preferentially through this receptor.
The production of the pro-inflammatory cytokine, TNF-a by the FMs in response to TLR3 and TLR8 activation, and IL-1b and IL-6 in response to viral ssRNA also suggests a role for the FMs in contributing to preterm birth. Levels of IL-1b, IL-6 and TNF-a are elevated in the amniotic fluids of patients with preterm birth and intra-amniotic infection (Romero et al., 1989 (Romero et al., , 1990 (Romero et al., , 1992a and IL-1b plays a role in promoting preterm labor (Sadowsky et al., 2006; Christiaens et al., 2008; Kemp et al., 2010) . These findings are also in keeping with previous reports that infection of human chorion cells with influenza virus, which is an ssRNA virus, induces the production of the pro-inflammatory cytokines, IL-1b, IL-6 and TNFa (Uchide et al., 2002b (Uchide et al., , 2006 .
In order to achieve IL-1b secretion, intracellular pro-IL-1b must be processed into its active, secreted form (Agostini et al., 2004; Martinon and Tschopp, 2004) , and this is often mediated by caspase-1 (Netea et al., 2010) that associates with the other inflammasome components, Nalp1 or Nalp3 and ASC (Agostini et al., 2004; Martinon and Tschopp, 2007) . We have previously reported that normal human FMs at term express all these components and in response to the bacterial TLR agonists, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), peptidoglycan and flagellin induce IL-1b processing and secretion via caspase-1 (Hoang et al., 2014) . A recent study by Lappas, also showed LPS-induced IL-1b by FMs to be mediated by caspase-1 (Lappas, 2014) . In this current study we demonstrated that human FMs exposed to viral ssRNA secrete IL-1b in a caspase-1 dependent manner, suggesting that TLR8 activation may induce inflammasome activity. Indeed, the TLR8 agonist, imidazoquinoline, can activate monocyte IL-1b production via caspase-1 (Philbin et al., 2012) , and viral ssRNA-mediated IL-1b release by monocytes is dependent on the Nalp3 inflammasome (Allen et al., 2011) .
To further explore the mechanisms by which viral dsRNA and ssRNA induce FM cytokine/chemokine production, we determined the functional role of the TLR adapter proteins, MyD88 and TRIF in this response. TLR3 is known to signal through TRIF (Yamamoto et al., 2002; Oshiumi et al., 2003) , while TLR8 signals through MyD88 (Heil et al., 2004; Han et al., 2012) . In this study we found that Poly(I:C) induced MIP-1a, MIP-1b and RANTES production via MyD88, MIP-1a production was also mediated by TRIF, but TNFa production was dependent upon neither adapter protein. This suggests that in FMs, Poly(I:C), in addition Effect of viral products on human fetal membranes to activating the TLR3/TRIF pathway, may also be activating another receptor utilizing MyD88. Alternatively, in human FMs, TLR3 may be able to signal through both adapter proteins, similarly to TLR4 (Yamamoto et al., 2003) . Indeed an early study reported that TLR3 could indeed utilize MyD88 (Alexopoulou et al., 2001) . The lack of dependency for either MyD88 or TRIF for Poly(I:C)-induced TNFa could again suggest activation of an alternative, TLR3-independent pathway (Hoebe et al., 2003) , such as the cytosolic RIG-like receptors (RLR) and non-RLR helicases (Vabret and Blander, 2013) . We found a similar differential usage of MyD88 and TRIF in FMs exposed to viral ssRNA. Both adapter proteins played a role in the secretion of the majority of cytokines and chemokines induced by ssRNA, except for MIP-1b, which was only dependent upon TRIF. This suggests that in the FMs, TLR8 can also utilize both MyD88 and TRIF, or that an additional TRIF-dependent pathway is activated. Indeed, Marshall-Clarke et al. (2007) , reported that TLR3 can sense both dsRNA and ssRNA. However, similarly to the Poly(I:C) response, TNFa was dependent upon neither adapter protein, as was MCP-1 production, again suggesting activation of a TLR-independent pathway (Vabret and Blander, 2013) .
Our last observation in this study was that Poly(I:C) triggered the expression of the type interferon, IFNb, and the IFN-inducible antiviral factors, OAS, MxA and APOBEC3G (Samuel, 2001; Turelli et al., 2004; Abrahams et al., 2006; Bonvin et al., 2006) . However, the antimicrobial peptide SLPI, which is not regulated by type I IFNs, but has been shown to be regulated by TLR3 in other tissues (Schaefer et al., 2005; Abrahams et al., 2006) , was not induced in Poly(I:C)-treated FMs. Furthermore, and in contrast to the Poly(I:C)-induced response, treatment of FMs with viral ssRNA did not induce the expression of IFNb or the antiviral factors. That FMs can generate this antiviral response to viral dsRNA is in keeping with observations that infection of human chorion cells with influenza induces IFNb (Uchide et al., 2002b) , and treatment of FM explants with Poly(I:C) elevates the production of IL-29 (IFN-lambda3) (Nace et al., 2010) , a virally induced type III IFN (Li et al., 2013) .
In summary, we have demonstrated that viral dsRNA and ssRNA induce distinct pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine responses in an MyD88/TRIF-dependent and independent manner. Thus, FM inflammatory responses to viral dsRNA and ssRNA may be both TLR dependent and TLR independent. The FM response to viral dsRNA [Poly(I:C)] appears more protective since a strong type I IFN and antiviral response is also generated, while the ssRNA-induced response is predominantly pro-inflammatory, and FM sensing of viral ssRNA may activate the inflammasome giving rise to IL-1b secretion. Together these findings provide further evidence of how different pattern recognition receptors can generate distinct responses in the FMs through distinct mechanisms, and suggest a role for viruses in promoting inflammation of the chorioamnion.
The electrical and optical properties of semiconductors depend sensitively on the electronic structure in the gap region and can hence be modified dramatically by the presence of native defects and impurities that introduce unwanted additional states inside the fundamental band gap. Most importantly, such electrically active defects can trap charge carriers (electrons or holes), counteracting the effect of intentional doping. If their concentration is sufficiently high, this process can lead to a full compensation of implanted acceptors and donors and thus eventually to Fermi-level pinning. Besides, electron-hole recombination at deep defects drastically reduces the lifetime of minority carriers, and transitions involving defect states inside the band gap may dominate optical absorption. This is especially relevant at surfaces and interfaces, where the crystal termination and the contact with other phases naturally give rise to a high number of structural defects that have been linked to the formation of Schottky barriers [1] . The central quantities are the optical defect levels inside the band gap and the charge-transition levels. The former can, in principle, be probed by direct (filled states) or inverse (empty states) photoemission. The Franck-Condon principle is well justified, as the rearrangement of the atoms happens on a much slower time scale than the electron emission or absorption, but the coupling to the atomic lattice may be visible in the line widths and shapes. The optical defect levels contain the full electronic relaxation in response to the created hole or the injected electron, however. The charge-transition levels, on the other hand, are thermodynamic quantities and specify the values of the Fermi energy where the charge state of the defect changes. Therefore, they are affected noticeably by the atomic relaxation taking place upon the addition or removal of an electron.
Despite considerable efforts, a reliable determination of the optical defect levels and the related charge-transition levels of deep defects still poses a very difficult challenge. Experimental investigations are thwarted by the fact that many traditional spectroscopic techniques are not applicable due to the low concentration of native point defects, while capacitance methods like deep-level transient spectroscopy [2] are very sensitive but provide no elemental or structural information to identify the type of defect. For surfaces, at least, Ebert et al. [3] now demonstrated how the electronic structure of individual defects can be deduced using a combination of scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and photoelectron spectroscopy, providing the first reliable experimental analysis of a chargetransition level for the P vacancy at InP(110). Theoretical approaches, on the other hand, must include accurate exchange-correlation contributions, the coupling between electronic and lattice degrees of freedom, and, in general, require the treatment of open systems in which the number of particles is not constant [4] . Previous studies that employed density-functional theory (DFT) in the localdensity approximation (LDA) [5] indeed suffered from fundamental limitations [3, 6, 7, 8] . For example, Ebert et al. [3] noted "that the systematic error for the calculated energies of the charge transfer levels is too large to identify the symmetry of the vacancy on the position of the defect level only." In order to overcome this problem we here propose a new computational approach, broadly applicable to defects in the bulk as well as at surfaces, that combines DFT with many-body perturbation theory. As an example, we examine the optical defect levels and the thermodynamic charge-transition levels of anion vacancies at GaAs(110) and InP(110). The results are in close agreement with the experimental analysis [3] .
The geometry of anion vacancies at the (110) surfaces of III-V semiconductors is now well understood thanks to a combination of experimental and theoretical studies. For p-doped materials STM images of the filled states under negative bias feature a localized hole at the position of the missing anion surrounded by a voltage-dependent depression [9] . The latter is due to a downward local band bending, indicating a positive charge of the va-cancy. The charge state is, in fact, established as +1 [10] , which is also predicted by electronic-structure calculations [3, 6, 7, 8] . STM images acquired under positive bias probe the empty p z -like orbitals of the cation sublattice and show an enhancement of the cations surrounding the vacancy, initially wrongly interpreted as an upward relaxation of those atoms [9] but now understood as arising from the local depression of the electron density. DFT-LDA calculations actually show that an inward relaxation of the two Ga atoms enclosing the As vacancy V + As at GaAs (110) is consistent with the observations [6, 7] . The symmetry of the positively charged anion vacancies was initially a matter of controversy [6, 7] . In STM images they appear symmetric, but in a combined experimental and theoretical study of V + P at InP(110) Ebert et al. [3] explained the observed features as resulting from the thermal flip motion between two degenerate asymmetric configurations. This interpretation later received further confirmation [11] . In n-doped materials, on the other hand, the vacancy is in a charge state of −1 [12] , and DFT-LDA calculations predict a symmetric relaxation for this configuration as well as the neutral vacancy [6, 7] .
The anion vacancies at GaAs(110) or InP(110) give rise to three nondegenerate electronic states, labeled 1a ′ , 1a
′′ , and 2a ′ . While the 1a ′ state is located several eV below the valence-band maximum and always filled with two electrons, and the 2a ′ state is too high in energy to become populated, the 1a ′′ state lies inside the band gap. It is this state, therefore, that is relevant for the discussion of charge-transition levels. Depending on the level of doping it may be occupied by zero, one, or two electrons, which corresponds to the positive, neutral, and negative charge state, respectively.
The formation energy of a surface vacancy with charge state q, relative to that of the neutral defect, is given by
where E vac (q, Q) denotes the total energy of a surface featuring a single vacancy with the actual electron population q ∈ {+, 0, −} and geometry optimized for charge state Q ∈ {Q + , Q 0 , Q − }. The final term accounts for the transfer of the charge q between the defect level and the electron reservoir, i.e., the Fermi energy ǫ F . The charge-transition levels ǫ q/q ′ are defined as the values of ǫ F where the charge state of the vacancy changes, i.e., where E form (q/0) = E form (q ′ /0), and conventionally given relative to the surface valence-band maximum. For the systems considered here the interesting transitions are ǫ +/0 and ǫ 0/− . For example, the former is
All previous DFT-LDA calculations for surface point defects evaluated this energy difference directly [3, 6, 7, 8] , but this approach leads to systematic errors that arise because the total energies E vac (0, Q 0 ) and E vac (+, Q + ) refer to systems with different electron numbers. As is well known, the exact exchange-correlation potential in DFT exhibits a discontinuity upon addition or removal of an electron [13] , which is not contained in the LDA or other jellium-based functionals. Besides, aspects like the self-interaction are treated inappropriately. As a consequence, the band gaps of semiconductors and the energies of localized defect states are not given correctly: for the P vacancy at InP(110) the experimentally determined ǫ +/0 level of 0.75±0.1 eV [3] contrasts noticeably with the calculated values 0.52 eV [3] and 0.388 eV [8] .
The variation between the two theoretical results can be traced to differences in the pseudopotentials and parallels the variation of the corresponding band gaps.
To arrive at a more accurate quantitative method that corrects the above-mentioned severe shortcomings of the LDA we rewrite Eq. (2) as
by adding and subtracting the total energy E vac (+, Q 0 ) of a system with the geometry of the relaxed neutral vacancy but a charge state q = +1. In this way the chargetransition level is decomposed into two separate contributions. The first describes the structural relaxation energy for the positive charge state and two different geometries: that of the neutral and that of the positive charge state. It is always positive. As the electron number remains constant, the problem of the discontinuity does not arise, and DFT-LDA is perfectly applicable. The second term equals the ionization energy of the neutral defect, where the removed electron is transfered to the reservoir, i.e., the Fermi energy. Determining the ionization potential from the quasiparticle band structure requires a correction of the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues, for which we employ many-body perturbation theory. Specifically, we use the G 0 W 0 approximation for the electronic self-energy [14] . This approach is known to yield reliable band gaps for III-V semiconductors [15] and their surfaces [16] .
In the same spirit, ǫ 0/− can be written as
The first term in this case describes the energy difference of the vacancy with q = −1 between its own equilibrium geometry and that of the neutral charge state. It is always negative. The second term equals the electron affinity of the neutral charge state. In principle, the self-energy of the neutral charge state yields both the ionization potential and the electron affinity, which correspond to the energy of the highest occupied and the lowest unoccupied quasiparticle state, respectively. From a computational point of view, however, this procedure is inconvenient, because the neutral defect has an odd number of electrons and requires a spin-polarized calculation. Instead, we follow an equivalent approach and extract the energy levels from two separate calculations for nonspin-polarized systems with an even number of electrons. In practice, we thus determine E vac (0, Q 0 ) − E vac (+, Q 0 ) as the electron affinity of the positive charge state and E vac (−, Q 0 ) − E vac (0, Q 0 ) as the ionization potential of the negative charge state, both in the Q 0 geometry.
In the following we apply the expressions derived above to anion vacancies at the (110) surfaces of GaAs and InP. To determine the defect geometries we use DFT together with norm-conserving pseudopotentials [17] and the LDA exchange-correlation functional [18] . The surfaces are simulated using a supercell with a (2×4) periodicity in the [001] and [110] directions, consisting of six atomic layers separated by a vacuum buffer equivalent to four layers. A single vacancy is created at one side of the slab, while the dangling bonds at the other are passivated by pseudoatoms with noninteger nuclear charges of 0.75 and 1.25 for anion and cation termination, respectively. This mimics the continuation of the substrate by a III-V bulk layer. We use the theoretical lattice constants 5.55Å for GaAs and 5.81Å for InP to prevent errors resulting from a nonequilibrium unit-cell volume during the surface relaxation. The integration in reciprocal space is carried out with a mesh corresponding to eight k-points in the two-dimensional Brillouin zone of the (1×1) unit cell of the defect-free surface. In the case of charged defects we apply a uniform compensating background in order to ensure overall charge neutrality. For GaAs we thus obtain the relaxation energies E vac (+, Before presenting our quasiparticle results, we first calculate the charge-transition levels strictly within the LDA by invoking the Slater-Janak transition-state approach [19] , where the ionization potential and the electron affinity equal the eigenvalue of the 1a ′′ level determined self-consistently with the noninteger occupancy 0.5 and 1.5, respectively. The transition state corrects, at least partially, the erroneous self-interaction of the LDA but not the discontinuity problem. The resulting energy contributions are displayed in Fig. 1 relative to the surface valence-band maximum. The occurrence of slightly negative values in some cases implies that the defect level actually falls below the valence-band maximum. This is an artefact of the constrained nonequilibrium geometry: if the atomic structure is allowed to relax, then the defect level always lies inside the band gap. For all systems studied here we find that the transition-state approach yields the same results, with a deviation of less than 0.01 eV, as a straightforward evaluation of Eq. (110) as a function of the occupation number. The geometry is identical in all calculations for the same material and optimized for the neutral charge state. The Slater-Janak transition-state approach (filled circles) yields the ionization potentials and electron affinities in the LDA. More accurate results are obtained by calculating the quasiparticle corrections within the G0W0 approximation (filled squares). In either case the energy zero is set to the respective surface valence-band maximum. experimentally derived charge-transition level as earlier studies at this level of approximation [3, 8] .
In order to determine the electronic contribution to the charge-transition levels more accurately we employ many-body perturbation theory. The energies derived within this framework correspond directly to the values measured in direct or inverse photoemission. We follow the usual approach to calculate the quasiparticle energies
as a first-order correction of the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues ǫ KS 1a ′′ . Here Σ is the complex, nonlocal, and frequencydependent self-energy, which we evaluate in the G 0 W 0 approximation using the Green function G 0 of the underlying Kohn-Sham system. Our numerical implementation is based on the space-time method [20] . The local exchange-correlation potential V xc must be subtracted from the self-energy to avoid double counting. A more detailed discussion of our computational method can be found in Ref. [21] . The quasiparticle corrections, but not the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues, are obtained from a smaller (2×2) surface cell, which reduces the computational effort considerably. Although we investigate charged systems, the relative self-energy shifts are insensitive to the size of the supercell, because they only include exchangecorrelation effects and no electrostatic Hartree contribution. Keeping the atomic positions fixed at the optimized geometry for the neutral vacancy, we performed separate G 0 W 0 calculations for the positive and negative charge states. The calculated 1a
′′ single-particle energies ǫ 1a ′′ (+, Q 0 ) and ǫ 1a ′′ (−, Q 0 ) are shown in Fig. 1 with and without the self-energy correction.
In Table I we summarize the results for the As vacancy at GaAs(110). Values in brackets refer to the constrained symmetric relaxation of V + As and are included for the purpose of comparison with earlier studies. In contrast to Refs. [6, 7] , which found a stable neutral charge state within a narrow energy window, our own calculation at the level of the LDA indicates ǫ +/0 > ǫ 0/− and hence a direct transition from the positive to the negative charge state, but the small energetic separation is within the uncertainty of the calculation. With the G 0 W 0 approximation we find a reversed ordering, which implies the existence of a stable neutral charge state, and a slightly increased splitting of the charge-transition levels.
The charge-transition levels for the P vacancy at InP(110) are listed in Table II . Our LDA results are similar to those reported previously [3, 8] and well below the experimentally deduced value of 0.75±0.1 eV [3] . The G 0 W 0 approximation, on the other hand, yields a value for ǫ +/0 that lies within the experimental error bar. In conclusion, we have developed a general computational scheme for the optical defect levels and thermodynamic charge-transition levels of point defects in semiconductors. The method is broadly applicable to the bulk as well as to surfaces. It relies on a separation of structural and electronic energy contributions that can be accurately evaluated within DFT and many-body perturbation theory, respectively. In this way the discontinuity of the exchange-correlation potential as well as other shortcomings of the LDA are treated appropriately. Our calculated (+/0) charge-transition level for the P vacancy at InP(110) is in close agreement with the experimental analysis, confirming the accuracy of this method.
Despite advances in surgical treatments, radiotherapy is superior in its ability to preserve function and appearance in the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). But some kinds of HNSCC are refractory to ionizing radiation, which results in the low effectiveness of radiotherapy alone [1, 2] . SCCVII cell line, is a spontaneously arising head and neck squamous carcinoma cell line from syngeneic C3H/HeJ mice [3] . An oral cancer murine model using the SCCVII cell line shares characteristics such as initial locoregional tumor invasion, direct extension into the neck, and early cervical metastases with human head and neck tumors [4] . So SCCVII cell line could be a good object to study the biological behavior of HNSCC.
One strategy to improve the effectiveness of radiotherapy is augmenting of tumour radiosensitivity [5] . In the latter study, SCCVII cells were found to be resistant to ionizing radiation. The cytotoxicity of ionizing radiation is mainly mediated through the generation of DNA-double strand break (DSB) as evidenced by the pronounced radiosensitivity of cells and organisms defective in the machinery of DSB repair [6] [7] [8] . Thus, inhibition of DSB repair provides a mechanism to enhance the cytotoxicity of IR in tumour cells. The ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) protein kinase is a critical component in these pathways and integrates the cellular response to damage by phosphorylating key proteins involved in cell cycle regulation and DSB repair [9, 10] . Lack of the normal ATM function in the inherited ataxia telangiectasia (AT) syndrome results in the profound hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation [11] [12] [13] . As mentioned elsewhere p53-wild-type cell lines with dysfunctional ATM, when irradiated, either show a lack of or delayed activation of p53, resulting in a defective G1/S cell-cycle checkpoint [14] . However, in p53 mutated cell lines, disruption of ATM resulted in defective G2/M checkpoint control, radio-resistant DNA synthesis, retarded cell proliferation and enhanced radiosensitivity [15, 16] . Therefore, we manage to examine whether reduction of ATM expression after antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (AS-ODNs) treatment would result in enhanced radiosensitivity of p53-mutated SCCVII cells from C3H/He mice through the aberrant G2/M checkpoint.
Reagents RPMI-1640 media and 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) were purchased from Gibco Company (Eggenstein, Germany). Lipofectamine 2000, Opti-MEM medium and Trizol kit were bought from Invitrogen Company(Carlsbad, CA, USA). SYBR ExScript RT-PCR Kit and SYBR Green Master Mix were purchased from Takara Biotechnology Company (Dalian, China). ATM monoclonal antibodies was bought from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA), and β-actin monoclonal antibodies from Sigma (St Louis, MO, USA). BCIP/NBT alkaline phosphatase substrate kit IV was purchased from Vector laboratories (Burlingame, CA, USA). TUNEL apoptosis detection kit was bought from Roche Company (Shanghai, China)
Cell lines and mice SCCVII cell line was generously obtained from the laboratory of gene therapy at Johns Hopkins University. SCCVII cells were cultured in complete RPMI-1640 media containing 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin. Cells were cultured as a monolayer at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Female C3H/He mice, aged 6-8 weeks, weighing 18-22 g, were obtained from Vital River Laboratories (Beijing, China) and were maintained in the animal facility at West China Medical School, Sichuan University in accordance with nation's related regulations and animal welfare requirements.
A 25-mer AS-ODN which was previously reported to inhibit ATM expression in mouse cerebrovascular endothelial cells [17] , and its associated controls, sense (Sen) and mismatch (Mis) ODNs, were synthesized by Shanghai Sangon Biological Engineering Technology & Services (Shangai, China). The sequences were as follows: AS, 5'-GTGCTAGACTCATGGTTTAAGATTT-3'; Sen, 5'-AAATCTTAAACCATGAGTCTAGCAC-3' and Mis, 5'-CCCCAGCAGCTCCCATTGGGCGTAA-3'. All the ODNs were chemically modified to phosphorothioate ODNs by substituting the oxygen molecules of the phosphate backbone with sulfur.
SCCVII cells at a density of 5 × 10 4 cells/ml were plated for overnight incubation. Cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS at 37°C and 5% CO2. After grew to 80%-90% fill, cells were replenished with incompleted RPMI-1640 medium, then treated with ATM AS-ODNs, ATM Sen-ODNs and Mis-ODNs. The procedures were as follows: 200 nM of ATM AS-ODNs, Sen-ODNs, Mis-ODNs and 2 mg/ml Lipofectamine 2000 were added to Opti-MEM medium separately, and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Then liposome and ODNs were mixed together respectively and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. SCCVII cells were washed again with Opti-MEM medium before transfection. The liposome ODNs complexes were carefully plated on the cells, and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2. After 6 hours transfected cells were washed twice with PBS, the medium was replaced with fresh RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, cells were incubated at 37°C overnight. A second ODNs incubation was performed before cells were exposed to radiation.
Total RNAs were extracted from cultured SCCVII cells using Trizol reagent according to the manufacture's protocol. RNA concentration and purity were determined on a UV spectrophotometer (BioRad Inc., Hercules, CA, USA) by the 260 nm absorbance and 260-280 nm absorbance ratio, respectively. Synthesis of cDNA was conducted using SYBR ExScript RT-PCR Kit according to manufacturer's instructions. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR for the ATM mRNA was performed on an ABI PRISM 7300 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) using SYBR Green Master Mix. For normalization the gene GAPDH was used. Final reaction volume is 25 μl. Cycling conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 95°C for 10 s, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 5 s and 59°C for 31 s. Each measurement was performed in triplicate. The gene expression levels obtained were normalized by mRNA expression of GAPDH. The relative mRNA expression was then presented in relation to the untreated control group. All oligonucleotide primers were designed and synthesized by Sangon (Shanghai, China). The primer sequences are listed as follows: ATM, forward, 5'-CCAGGGGAAGATGATGAAGA-3' reverse 5'-CTACAATGAGCTGCGTGTGG-3'; GAPDH, forward,5'-CCTCAAGATTGTCAGCAAT-3' reverse, 5'-CCATC-CACAGTCTTCTGAGT-3'.
Total proteins extracted from SCCVII cells were separated on 10% or 15% SDS-polyacrylamide gels. Fifty micrograms each of the preparations were fractionated by 12.5% SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA). The membrane was blocked with 3% milk powder in PBS at room temperature for 3 hours, washed with TBS (PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20) for 10 min three times, then incubated with the ATM monoclonal antibodies (1:1000 dilution) or β-actin monoclonal antibodies (1:2000 dilution) in TBS containing 1% milk powder at 4°C overnight. After three washes with TBS, the membrane was incubated with alkaline phosphatase-labeled anti-mouse IgG antibody in TBS containing 1% milk powder at room temperature for 3 hours and washed again with TBS three times. The membrane was briefly equilibrated with PBS and visualized with the BCIP/NBT alkaline phosphatases substrate kit IV. Reactive bands were scanned by Gel Doc 1000 (Bio-Rad). The experiment was repeated three times.
ELEKTA Precise radiation system (Elekta, Sweden) was used to irradiate cells and solid tumor. X-ray irradiation was performed at room temperature at a dose rate of 200 cGy/min and equipped with an external 0.5-mm copper filter.
The SCCVII cells were seeded in triplicate at limiting dilutions in 6-well plates for about 24 hours in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS until attached. Then the cells were transfected with ATM AS-ODNs, ATM Sen-ODNs and Mis-ODNs respectively. About 18 hours after transfection, they were irradiated with different doses of X-ray radiation(0, 2, 4, 6, and 8 Gy) respectively. The medium was replaced with a fresh one 24 hours after irradiation. After 7 days of incubation, the colonies were fixed with methanol, stained with 0.5% crystal violet in absolute ethanol and colonies with >50 cells were counted under dissection microscope. In each irradiation dose group, surviving fraction (SF) of cells was calculated as plating efficiency of the irradiated cells divided by the plating efficiency of the irradiated cells by that of the untreated control.
After 48 hours exposed to 2 Gy radiation, cells were harvested, and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 2 min. Then cells were washed with PBS twice, and fixed with 70% icy-cold ethanol at 4°C overnight. Cells were stained with PI at 4°C for 30 min. Cell cycle progression and apoptotic rate were analyzed by flow cytometry (Elite ESP, Beckman Coulter, USA).
Female C3H/He mice were used to investigate the effect of ATM AS-ODNs on radiosensitivity of SCCVII cells solid tumor. All surgical procedures and care administered to the animals were in accordance with institutional guidelines. Animal surgeries and radiotherapy were performed under general anesthesia, 50 mg/kg ip injection of pentobarbital sodium. About 5 × 10 6 SCCVII cells were subcutaneously inoculated in submental space of the mice. Tumor growth rates were determined by measuring two orthogonal dimensional diameters of each tumor twice a week. Tumour volumes were estimated according to the formula V = π/6 × a2 × b, where a is the short axis, and b the long axis. When tumors reached an average volume of about 200 mm 3 , the tumor-bearing C3H/He mice were divided into four groups: (a) control group, no treatment; (b) ATM AS-ODNs group, tumors were treated with ATM AS-ODNs alone but not exposed to irradiation for each time; (c) irradiation group, tumors were exposed to X-ray of 2 Gy alone for each time; and (d) combination group, 2.5 mg/kg of ATM AS-ODNs was injected into the solid tumor the day before X-ray exposure, another dosage of ATM AS-ODNs was injected right before exposure to 2 Gy of X-ray for each time. The same treatment for each group were repeated 3 times (the interval time was 5 days). C3H/ He mice were killed 3 weeks later. The ATM protein expression of the tumor in the different groups were ananlysed by western blot using the procedures described as above. The tumor inhibition rate was evaluated using the following formula: (1-average tumor volume of experimental group/average tumor volume of control group) × 100%.
Terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTPdigoxigenin nick-end-labeling (TUNEL) assay TUNEL staining of tumour sections was performed using an in situ apoptosis detection kit (Roche, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacture's protocol. The total number of apoptotic cells in 10 randomly selected fields was counted. The apoptotic index (AI) was calculated as the percentage of positive staining cells, namely AI = number of apoptotic cells × 100/total number of nucleated cells.
Results were expressed as mean ± standard deviation(SD). SPSS12.0 software package was used to perform statistical analysis. One-way ANOVA test was used to determine statistical difference between the experimental groups with others. Differences were considered statistically significant at P < 0.05.

We analyzed the expression of ATM in mRNA and protein level in SCCVII cells using real-time fluorescent quantitative PCR and western blot assay respectively. After 48 hours treatment, there were no significant difference among the group treated with liposome alone, the group treated with Sen-ODNs and the group treated with MisODNs (P > 0.05; Figure. 1 ). However when incubating with liposome formulations of ATM AS-ODNs, the relative ATM mRNA expression was only about 25.7 ± 3.1% to the untreated SCCVII cells, which demonstrated a significantly reduced expression of ATM mRNA (P < 0.05; Figure. 1 ). As shown in Figure. 2, ATM protein expression was also significantly reduced by ATM AS-ODNs compared with Sen-ODNs and Mis-ODNs after 72 hours treatment ( Figure. 2A) . The relative ATM protein expression of SCCVII cells treated with ATM AS-ODNs was only about 24.1 ± 2.8% to the untreated cells (P < 0.05; Figure. 2B ). But there was no significant difference among the group treated with liposome alone, the group treated with SenODNs and the group treated with Mis-ODNs (P > 0.05; Figure. 2B).
Cellular response to ionizing radiation was evaluated by clonogenic survival assay. Compared with untreated cells or cells treated with control ODNs, cloning efficiency declined notably in cells which transfected with ATM ASODNs at the same dose of radiation ( Figure. 3) . The survival fraction after 2 Gy (SF2) reflect the cellular intrinsic radiosensitivity. The SF2 of cells transfected with ATM ASODNs was 53.3 ± 3.1%, definitely lower than that of other cells, which indicated a significant increase in the radiosensitivity (P < 0.05; Figure. 3). There were no obvious differences among the other groups about clonogenic survival ability (P > 0.05; Figure. 3).
After 2 Gy irradiation, the apoptotic rate in ATM AS-ODNs transfected cells was 24.7 ± 2.5%, which was higher than that in Sen-ODNs and Mis-ODNs transfected cells (P < 0.05; Figure. 
In the group treated with ATM AS-ODNs alone and the group irradiated in combination with the treatment of ATM AS-ODNs, the relative ATM protein expression were only 63.4 ± 5.6% and 62.1 ± 6.1% to the untreated group respectively (P < 0.05; Figure. 6 ). Tumor growth of the mice in four groups were shown in Figure. 7. The inhibition rate in SCCVII cells solid tumor exposed to X-ray alone was 23.2 ± 2.7%, while it was 56.1 ± 3.8% in solid tumor irradiated in combination with the treatment of ATM AS-ODNs at the experimental endpoint(P < 0.05; Figure. 7).
Only small numbers of apoptotic cells were detected by TUNEL analysis in tumors treated with irradiation alone. In contrast with irradiation alone, tumor cell apoptosis was doubled following irradiation in combination with ATM AS-ODNs treatment ( Figure. 8A) . Accordingly, the AI for tumors from ATM AS-ODNs treated mice was 19.6 ± 3.2, significantly higher than that of the other groups (P < 0.05; Figure. 
Damage to cellular DNA evokes a wide range of cellular responses that lead to activation of a variety of genes necessary for cellular survival, delay in cell-cycle progression, and induction of DNA repair [18] [19] [20] . ATM protein is a key mediator of the radioprotective machinery inducing a signaling network that is responsible for repair of radiationinduced damaged DNA and for cellular recovery and survival [21] [22] [23] . Rasheed had found that disruption of the ATM gene in mice resulted in exquisite sensitivity to low doses of ionizing radiation [24] . Yin demonstrated that treatment of mouse cerebrovascular endothelial cells with ATM AS-ODNs led to specific inhibition of ATM induction, and increased radiation-induced apoptosis in vitro [17] . Therefore we designed the experiment to test the hypothesis whether ATM AS-ODNs could inhibit the expression of ATM in SCCVII cells and furthermore increase the radiosensitivity by enhancing radiationinduced apoptosis in vitro and in vivo.
In the present study, we successfully transfected ATM ASODNs into SCCVII cells using liposome as delivery carrier, and detected the inhibitory expression of ATM at mRNA and protein level in SCCVII cells. We found that expression of ATM was dramatically reduced after cells were transfected with ATM AS-ODNs compared with that Sen-ODNs and Mis-ODNs treated groups, which indicated that the inhibition was specific for the ATM antisense sequence. Then we investigated whether the reduction of ATM expression resulted in radiosensitization in SCCVII cells. The results of clonogenic survival assay in vitro demonstrated that the cloning efficiency declined notably in cells which transfected with ATM ASODNs at the same dose of radiation (P < 0.05) compared with untreated cells or cells treated with control ODNs. While the SF2 of cells transfected with ATM AS-ODNs was 53.3 ± 3.1%, definitely lower than that of other cells, which means the increase of cell intrinsic radiosensitivity. Furthermore we investigated whether the increased radioSurvival curves for SCCVII cells after irradiation Figure 3 Survival curves for SCCVII cells after irradiation. Survival fractions at each dose point were normalized to untreated cells. * P < 0.05, The mean of SF2 in the cells transfected with ATM AS-ODNs was significantly lower than that of other cells. sensitivity in SCCVII cells was due to the enhanced radiation-induced apoptosis and defective cell-cycle checkpoint. As we known, in p53 mutated cell lines, ATM mainly regulates the G2/M checkpoint to arrest cells in G2 phase at the time of irradiation where the radiationinduced DSBs can be repaired [15, 16] . From flow cytometry, we found that the cells did not accumulate in the G2/ M phase following irradiation in cells transfected with ATM AS-ODNs, which mean the reduced ATM expression resulted in the defective G2/M checkpoint control. Moreover, we found that radiation-induced apoptosis increased among the cells lack of ATM expression compared with those cells that have impact ATM expression.
In our study, we also investigated the effects of ATM ASODNs on the apoptotic responses to ionizing radiation in vivo. It was found that the tumors irradiated in combination with the treatment of ATM AS-ODNs were effective in controlling tumor growth and showed higher apoptotic rate. The inhibition rate in the tumors injected with ATM AS-ODNs before exposure to X-ray was 56.1 ± 3.8%, whereas it was 23.2 ± 2.7% in tumors exposed to radiation alone, and a significant difference was found between these two groups (P < 0.05). The results of TUNEL assay demonstrated that the apoptotic rate of the tumors irradiated in combination with the treatment of ATM AS-ODNs was obviously higher than that of control groups. The results of in vivo experiments indicated that the radiosensitivity of SCCVII cells solid tumors were enhanced by the The apoptotic rate of SCCVII cells after 2 Gy irradiation Figure 4 The apoptotic rate of SCCVII cells after 2 Gy irradiation. The apoptotic rate (Apo) in ATM AS-ODNs transfected cells was higher than that in Sen-ODNs and Mis-ODNs transfected cells after 2 Gy irradiation. * P > 0.05, no significant difference among these groups. ** P < 0.05, compared with other groups. treatment of ATM AS-ODNs and related with the increased radiation-induced apoptosis.
We had demonstrated that the ATM AS-ODNs used in our study could specificly reduce the ATM expression and further result in an increased radiosensitivity in SCCVII cells in vitro and in vivo. The potential mechanism of radiosensitization related with reduced ATM expression should be the defective G2/M cell-cycle checkpoint control and enhanced radiation-induced apoptosis. formed the rest of the experiments and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Thanks to a combination of experimental assays and computational studies, knowledge about protein function has been steadily accumulating in public databases, where it is commonly described through the Gene Ontology 1 (GO). On the one hand, hypothesis-driven research has traditionally led to the thorough characterization of one or few proteins at a time. On the other hand, high-throughput technologies have opened the way to very large-scale exploratory surveys to study biological processes, identify binding partners, or establish subcellular locations. Meanwhile, some homology-based approaches for annotation transfers have developed enough to produce fairly confident results. The GO consortium, for instance, makes wide use of a semi-automated tool for phylogenetic analysis and functional inference 2 , and of mappings between protein domain families to GO terms that are valid for all their members 3 . Despite these multi-pronged efforts, however, a substantial fraction of deposited sequences still have no functional annotation at all, and the remaining ones usually lack assignments for at least one GO domain. When available, this information may not be at the finest level of detail possible, not only because of the way some electronically inferred annotations are generated, but also because of the varying levels of resolution characterizing experimental results 4, 5 . Finally, nature can still spring surprises: protein moonlighting demonstrates that novel functions can still await discovery even for well-researched proteins 6 . One way to fill in some of these gaps employs machine learning to examine diverse biological data types separately or in combination, and to provide functional hypotheses that complement homology-based annotation transfers [7] [8] [9] . In particular, over the years several supervised methods have been devised for function prediction from amino acid sequences, which are easier to collect than structural data or genome-wide measurements of gene expression or protein-protein interactions. GOStruct 10 and FANN-GO 11 , for instance, make GO term assignments by analysing the patterns of BLAST 12 E-values to experimentally characterized proteins using structured Support Vector Machines (SVM) and multioutput neural networks, respectively. Given the computational complexity of training classifiers with multiple correlated outputs, it is difficult to learn the relationship between the input features and the whole GO; the proponents have therefore adopted workarounds such as reducing the number of output terms and ensemble modelling. Rather than tackling this complex structured learning problem, other researchers have tested with success the possibility of converting it into a set of simpler binary classification tasks. This approach has recently allowed our group to train GO term-specific neural networks from features describing the results of profile-profile comparisons 13 . Alignment-derived features, such as similarity scores, sequence coverage and E-values, can help learn which sequence similarity patterns correlate with the conservation of individual annotations, thus allowing more effective control on homology-based annotation transfers. Complementary efforts have investigated the usefulness of biophysical attributes to make homology-free inferences, under the assumption that proteins with similar functions would have similar biological features despite the lack of significant sequence similarities. For example, the occurrence of signal peptides gives useful hints about protein subcellular location, and also limits the number of their molecular functions and of the biological processes they partake. The idea was first implemented in ProtFun, which is based on neural networks trained for the functional classification of protein sequences from similarities in amino acid composition, and content of signal peptides, trans-membrane helices, post-translationally modified residues as well as other biological features 14, 15 . The observation that the length and position of intrinsically disordered protein regions strongly correlates with some molecular activities and biological processes led to an expanded set of sequence-derived features, which FFPred scans through a library of GO term-specific SVMs to annotate protein chains 16, 17 . A more recent study has confirmed the effectiveness of this feature-based approach with the use of random forests for supervised learning 18 . In this paper, we describe the latest FFPred release, which updates the previous one with an extended vocabulary spanning all three GO domains, reflecting the increasing attention in cellular component annotations, as evidenced from recent experiments in the Critical Assessment of Functional Annotation initiative. We evaluate FFPred 3 prediction accuracy using two complementary approaches and describe its improvements over the previous version. Finally, we show how its predictions can help get a glimpse into the effects of alternative splicing on human protein function. The results show patterns of functional conservation and variation consistent with the presence or absence of particular biophysical attributes and with general biological knowledge.
Summary of tool updates. Thanks to the continued growth of annotation databases, the latest FFPred release features a GO term vocabulary, which spans all three GO domains for the first time and is almost twice the size of that in the previous update. Supplementary Data file 1 lists the 868 GO terms, for which a dedicated SVM is available along with the classification accuracy estimated from the validation experiments following the training procedures. The new release makes still use of SVMs, which are known to successfully handle imbalanced classification tasks-typical in computational biology-where it is extremely important to allow for error control and avoid overfitting to known observations. Subcellular localization prediction has been the focus of many previous studies, which mostly focused on the well-known compartments of eukaryotic cells-such as nucleus, cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, mitochondrion and other organelles. The newly added cellular component terms in FFPred 3 also include some of the numerous macromolecular complexes found in them. The extensions to the other two sub-ontologies provide more specific descriptions for functional categories previously covered, and they reflect the increasing body of knowledge in areas such as organelle localization, immune system and reproductive processes, response to stimuli and chromosome segregation. A small fraction of molecular function and biological process terms have been removed (Fig. 1a,b) , because they no longer occur in curated databases-mostly after the GO consortium made them obsolete. The majority of functional categories that have been retained can be predicted with negligible changes in expected accuracy-though some exceptions exist. As a consequence of the extended knowledge about human protein function since the last update, the patterns of biophysical attrbutes linked to terms such as sulfur compound metabolic process (GO:0006790), neurotrophin TRK receptor signaling pathway (GO:0048011), growth factor activity (GO:0008083) and protein kinase binding (GO:0019901) can be more easily identified and modelled. For other functions, such as calcium ion transport (GO:0006816), single organismal cell-cell adhesion (GO:0016337), ATPase activity (GO:0016887), and nuclease activity (GO:0004518), SVM performance has dropped, suggesting that their relationships to sequence-derived features are more complex than previously appreciated (Fig. 1c,d) .
The tool is designed with a focus on the function of human proteins, and so annotations curated for other organisms are never used for training. To learn effectively the relationship between biophysical attributes and GO terms, sufficiently large numbers of positive instances are needed, thus limiting the specificity of the functional categories that can be currently predicted. While this feature may not be desirable for all applications, its benefits to overcome some well-known limitations of homology-based annotation transfers have already been reported 15, 17 . Interestingly, previous work showed that the tool can also help annotate protein function for other eukaryotic organisms. The updated tool is publicly available on the web at http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/ffpred.
Performance evaluation. The accuracy estimates in Supplementary Data file 1 are GO term-specific and point out the usefulness of FFPred 3 to prioritize human genes for downstream experimental screening when homology offers little or no help. To complement this analysis and gauge how well protein function as a whole can be predicted for such difficult cases, a timed experiment similar to the Critical Assessment of Functional Annotation challenge was conducted, by training a separate SVM library using the public databases released in November 2013. The resulting 597 classifiers were then used to assign GO terms to human proteins with no experimentally verified biological roles at that time, and their accuracy was finally measured against the UniProtKB-GOA data as of March 2016. For comparison purposes under difficult working conditions with limited or completely missing homology information, additional predictions were generated by a baseline method (Naïve), which ranks GO terms by prevalence in UniProtKB-GOA, and by a sequence similarity-based approach (BLAST), which can transfer annotations only from distantly related and experimentally characterized proteins as detailed in Methods. Other machine-learning based tools for GO term prediction from patterns of biological features could not be included in the study: ProtFun 15 has not been updated in a very long time and only covers a handful of currently valid GO terms, whereas ProFET 18 requires training from scratch classifiers for all GO categories of interest.
The precision-recall plots in Fig. 2 and the data in Table 1 provide graphical and numerical reports on the evaluation results for the three separate GO domains, according to standard practice in the field. At high levels of recall (i.e. above roughly 40% for molecular function and 20% for the other two sub-ontologies), FFPred 3 predictions achieve higher precision values than the baseline approaches do, and the maximum F-scores in Table 1 clearly back up this observation. However, the highest scoring predictions made by BLAST for subcellular locations and by Naïve for all sub-ontologies attain higher precision than the corresponding ones by FFPred 3. This result surprisingly suggests that these less sophisticated approaches are more useful than FFPred 3, when only a handful of assays can be run on each protein. Or are they?
It is widely accepted that an obvious pitfall of precision-recall analysis is the total disregard of how informative predictions are. The most confident GO term assignments made by Naïve for each test protein-GO:0043226 (binding), GO:0005488 (organelle) and GO:0009987 (cellular process)-are far from useful in cutting down the options for the design of experiments, indeed. Nonetheless, their very shallow nature guarantees that they will be eventually confirmed for most, if not all, proteins. Furthermore, comparing the precision values achieved by different methods and plotted against the same level of recall could be more ambiguous than it looks at first sight. If the recall is less than 1.0, the predictors are evaluated on non-identical sets of target proteins, which can even be disjoint. Another confounding aspect is the number of GO term predictions above a given decision threshold made for individual proteins: predictors based on high-throughput functional data aim at high recall and generally produce longer lists of assignments than those generated by methods based on homology transfers, which tend to achieve higher precision. Finally, correctly assigning the term t to distinct proteins p and q can pose prediction challenges of diverse nature, depending on how many proteins are annotated with t, and on how closely p and q follow the patterns of features used to build the classifiers-e.g. sequence similarity, domain architecture, biological attributes, gene expression and so on. Therefore, it is useful to look at method performance from a different angle, by considering both the accuracy and the informativeness of equal numbers of high scoring predictions for each target and sub-ontology-thus reducing the above biases and yielding results that can be interpreted more clearly and more easily by non-specialists, too.
The top row panels in Fig. 3 summarize prediction quality in terms of F 1 measure and the underlying precision and recall values are plotted in Figure S1 . It is quite clear that FFPred 3 is superior to both Naïve and BLAST across all three GO domains, because it achieves higher recall than the other predictors do, in combination with intermediate values of precision. The data also clearly confirm the expectation that Naïve predictions Table 1 . Performance comparison between FFPred 3 and the baseline prediction methods. For each method, the table reports the total numbers of true positives (TP), false positives (FP) and false negatives (FN) each method achieves at the decision threshold that maximises the F 1 score for each GO domain. NP is the number of proteins with at least one prediction with a confidence score greater than or equal to the corresponding threshold value, which is used to calculate the average precision of each method according to equation (4) in the main text. The average recall is calculated using equation (5) using the number of proteins with annotations in the GO domain under consideration, which can be found in the section "Methods". The latter two values are used to locate the full triangles in the precision-recall space shown in Fig. 2 . generally are highly precise, but not deep enough in the GO graph to outperform the other approaches in terms of recall. The results for the CC sub-ontology are an interesting exception: the low numbers of false negatives most likely arise from the relatively shorter distances between nodes associated with experimental annotations and nodes associated with the most frequent terms in UniProtKB-GOA. The plots also clearly illustrate the limits of homology-based transfers in such challenging situations. When the evolutionary distances from previously annotated proteins are large, only the most general functional aspects are retained (e.g. catalytic or transporter activity), while the finer details diverge (e.g. the nature of the substrates and the chemistry of the reactions), thus resulting in high numbers of both false positives and false negatives, and ultimately affecting negatively precision, recall and F-measure values.
As mentioned above, the design and implementation of FFPred 3 produced a list of GO terms with varying levels of detail, so it could be questioned how informative its predictions are and how helpful they can be to experimenters. In Fig. 3 , the plots in the bottom row show the average amount of useful information the highest scoring predictions would actually provide. For this purpose, the analysis only considers true positive predictions, which are not regarded as equally valuable as in the standard precision-recall analysis, however. They are rather weighted according to their information content, which estimates their specificity and informativeness from their occurrence in the UniProtKB/SwissProt database -so that more frequent functional categories are down-weighted, and vice versa. The plots undoubtedly prove that FFPred 3 correct predictions are consistently more specific than those generated by BLAST, which in turn are more specific than those made by Naïve. Therefore, despite the relatively low levels of term specificity, FFPred 3 can give useful hints to drive the experimental characterization of proteins, when routes alternative to homology transfers are needed. Table S1 gives some clear examples of how well FFPred 3 top-ranked predictions compare with the validated GO term assignments, which some proteins with no prior experimental functional data have recently acquired.
Insights into the functional consequences of alternative splicing in humans. Experimentally supported functional information for individual splice variants is generally scarce-only a handful of isoform-level GO term annotations have been reviewed and included in public databases. Even when some isoforms encoded by the same gene have been assayed, the data are still largely incomplete, because the experiments are usually focussed on a particular functional aspect. Within this active area of research, FFPred 3 and similar methods for protein function prediction have the opportunity to help investigate the functional ramifications of alternative splicing. Indeed, very often comparative sequence analysis can only suggest that the relatively small sequence changes between splice isoforms cause more or less pronounced structural and functional differences. In other words, this approach is typically unable to put forward more detailed testable hypotheses. This opens up the possibility that alternative splicing products may not encode biochemically active molecules, but rather constitute a reservoir for natural selection [19] [20] [21] -a conjecture that is also hard to verify. Notwithstanding, experimental evidence shows that the functional divergence between alternative splice variants can vary from subtle modulations of biochemical activities to completely antagonistic regulatory roles 22 . It is therefore interesting to investigate: i) which functional aspects tend to be more robust to splicing, and consequently conserved across splice variants of the same gene; and ii) whether canonical isoforms tend to be enriched in functions that are different from those over-represented in their alternative variants-see Methods for further details on the conservation and primarity scores.
To examine these patterns, a large-scale survey was carried out on 9,214 human proteins and their recorded splice variants using FFPred 3, under the assumption that eventually they all fulfil a physiological role in the cell. The analysis was restricted to the GO term predictions compatible with the manually curated assignments existing in UniProtKB/SwissProt, as to reduce the effects of spurious results on the biological interpretation. The summary data in Supplementary Data file 2 indicate that the GO terms used in this study display varying levels of conservation across sets of alternatively spliced transcripts, even though it is difficult to assess the statistical significance of the observed differences. Only five predicted (and admittedly broad) functions appear to be consistently assigned to all the variants of a gene, and very few of them are highly conserved, when the focus is on the most reliably predicted GO terms-i.e. the SVM Matthews correlation coefficient value is in the top 50% of the distribution recorded for the corresponding sub-ontology. For instance, only six of such terms annotate all isoforms of a gene in 90% or more of the cases examined. Therefore, despite the use of a consolidated set of predictions, the findings support the expectation that alternative splicing plays a role in diversifying the cellular functional repertoire. Support for this theory is strengthened by the differential associations of individual biological roles with canonical or alternative splice isoforms -as gauged by the GO term primarity scores. The Supplementary Data file 3 indicate that there are many more GO categories preferentially associated with principal variants than with alternative ones, partly because these analyses are restricted to predicted functions in line with available annotations in UniProtKB/SwissProt. Nevertheless, the GO terms with high primarity scores tend to represent more constitutive cellular functions, and those with negative scores appear to be mostly associated with larger sets of alternatively spliced genes or to be induced by changes in the environment or in the cellular conditions. As mentioned above, it is difficult to draw statistically sound conclusions from this initial study: identifying the canonical isoform of each gene is still an open question, and here a rather simple and pragmatic approach was taken just like in previous studies.
To emphasize the unique advantages that analyzing biological features can offer, Fig. 4 gives some insight into their relationship with some of the most conserved functions in each GO domain-see Methods for more details. The heatmap allows to link the over-and under-representation of specific biophysical attributes with the conservation of particular functional aspects. Similarly, Figs 5 and 6 show the extent of positive or negative correlation between sequence-derived feature groups and the GO terms that are preferentially associated with principal or alternative splice variants, respectively. The results generally reflect well-established trends between functional categories and the occurrence or lack of intrinsically disordered residues, transmembrane helices and signal peptides, and these interpretable patterns of association also apply to extended lists of GO terms, which are either expected to be predicted with lower confidence or to be less conserved ( Figures S2, S3 and S4 ).
The figures above provide a general overview across the whole human isoform proteome; however, the online server allows to study how alternative splicing is likely to preserve or abolish individual functions, by providing a detailed graphical view of the biological features detected in the input sequences. The following showcases how functional conservation and variation are consistent with the presence or absence of particular biophysical attributes and, most importantly, with independent biological knowledge.
Protein intrinsic disorder has long been linked to binding activities and regulatory processes in the light of both experimental and computational investigations [23] [24] [25] , and its enrichment in DNA binding proteins has a two-fold explanation. Basic leucine zipper (bZIP) and AT hook domains-both well known examples of disordered regions-are frequently found in many transcription factors and regulators, and some are conserved in their splice isoforms, too. The proto-oncogene c-Fos (UniProt accession P01100) and the high mobility group protein HMGI-C (UniProt accession P52926) include one bZIP and three AT hook motifs, respectively, which are all conserved across their known splice isoforms. Most often, however, DNA binding proteins usually include additional disordered segments that are not directly involved in DNA binding, but rather in the establishment of transient and highly specific protein-protein interactions for transactivation purposes. These regions are either maintained upon splicing-like the C-terminal domain of c-Fos-or swapped with other disordered segments to rewire cellular and signaling networks 26 . Signal peptides and transmembrane helices provide useful hints about protein subcellular localization and transmembrane transporter activities. They are unsurprisingly over and under-represented accordingly in those splice isoforms that need to retain the corresponding roles. The main and alternative isoforms of both the calcium-transporting ATPase type 2C member 1 (UniProt accession P98194) and of the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 3E (UniProt accession A5X5Y0) clearly illustrate this point. Alternative splicing hardly affects the transmembrane segments of these channels-only the isoform P98194-2 loses one helix-therefore they still localize in the membrane, and likely act as transporters of possibly different molecules.
Some associations-such as those between beta strands and several functional categories-may not look blatantly obvious, but brief scrutiny reveals their consistency with known biological facts. Nucleotides such as FAD, NAD and NADP are commonly bound by β α β super-secondary structure motifs, which usually occur in tandem in the Rossman fold where they can form relatively large beta sheets. Mitochondrial glutathione reductase (UniProt accession P00390) has five known isoforms that all preserve the nucleotide binding site, for instance, thus suggesting that the sequence differences do not impact this functional aspect, but something else. It is known that the isoform P00390-1 is indeed found in the mithocondrion, while isoform P00390-2 is cytoplasmatic, for instance. The enrichment of residues in beta strands in isoforms at the cell periphery is also easily explained by the abundance of immunoglobulin-like (Ig-like) domains, which fold into a beta sandwich structure and are involved in a wide range of functions such as cell surface recognition, immune response and muscle structural organization. Both the mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule 1(UniProt accession Q13477) and the leukocyte Ig-like receptor subfamily A member 5 (UniProt accession A6NI73) exemplify well this over-representation. Both proteins include a signal peptide followed by two Ig-like domains, one transmembrane helix and a C-terminal cytosolic region. All recorded splicing events cause the removal or replacement of sequence regions outside the signal peptide and the core of the Ig-like domains, thus proving that the alternative variants are still secreted. Based on these examples, we would expect that this updated version of FFPred 3 will assist experimentalists narrow down the number of assays to functionally characterize individual variants of their own interest. In turn, those efforts will definitely stimulate further bio-curation work to interpret this information and make it available in machine-readable format. Initial computational studies have been carried out to advance this area of functional genomics using gene expression profile data 27, 28 ; their integration with other complementary sources of biological information that are tissue and condition-specific will undoubtedly be the focus of many more investigations in the near future. , and the following is a brief overview of the procedure, which is also graphically summarised in Supplementary Figure S5 . Candidate functional classes were identified based on the availability of sufficiently large and confident positive and negative instances, which were split into training (70%) and validation (30%) data. The training subset was then encoded through 258 sequence-derived features covering a range of 14 different functional and structural aspects; the resulting vectors were fed into SVM-Light 32 to perform feature selection and parameter optimization. Based on the number of training instances available for each function, the number of folds k ranges between 3 and 5, within the constraint that the partitions are equally sized. Feature selection was performed using a backward elimination approach, which involves first using all feature groups to estimate classification accuracy, and then iteratively testing if the removal of each feature group improves it. At each step, a grid search of the SVM hyper-parameter space was conducted with k-fold cross-validation to estimate SVM performance using the highest average Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC)
where TP is the number of proteins correctly labelled as positives (true positives); TN is the number of proteins correctly labelled as negatives (true negatives); FP is the number of misclassified negative cases (false positives); and FN is the number of misclassified positive instances (false negatives). These parameters were used to build a binary classifier from all training examples, the performance of which was tested against the proteins in the unseen validation set. Only GO terms corresponding to predictors achieving MCC ≥ 0.05 were retained, and for them FFPred 3 makes predictions with SVMs trained on the joint training and validation sets to make the most of available annotations. Platt scaling 33 is applied to estimate the posterior probability that the input protein performs the function associated with a SVM given the raw output score.
Datasets and procedures for performance evaluation. Only for the purpose of estimating prediction accuracy, an intermediate version of the SVM library was trained using the GO OBO flat file released on 2013-11-05, the UniProt-GOA gene association file for human submitted to the GO Consortium on 2013-10-28, UniProtKB and UniRef90 release 2013_10. The training procedures outlined above produced a vocabulary consisting of 400 terms in the biological process (BP) domain, 108 in the molecular function (MF) domain, and 89 in the cellular component (CC) domain, which allowed to make predictions for all human protein sequences released as targets of the second Critical Assessment of Functional Annotation challenge 34 . The benchmark set was collated from the UniProt-GOA gene association file, by selecting those human proteins that received GO term assignments supported by evidence code EXP, IDA, IMP, IGI, IEP, TAS or IC between 2014-01-20 (end of the CAFA2 prediction stage) and 2016-03-14 (the database release date). Annotations to the term "protein binding" (GO:0005515) were discarded because they convey limited functional information unless the context is quoted (e.g. where and when the activity takes place and the requirement or absence of other molecules), and because these qualifiers are neglected by current function prediction evaluation protocols. This resulted in 3,881 annotations for 1,365 proteins in total-602 MF annotations for 454 proteins, 1,802 BP annotations for 661 proteins, and 1,477 CC annotations for 991 proteins.
Prediction accuracy was measured separately for each GO domain by precision-recall analysis as in similar studies following the lead of the CAFA experiments 34, 35 . For each protein x in the benchmark set and decision threshold v, the set of predicted terms P x,v was built by collecting all terms with confidence scores greater than or equal to v and their ancestors in GO linked by "is a" relationships and different from the root; the set of reference terms R x was generated in a similar way by up-propagating the validated annotations for x. These sets were used to calculate the number of true positives tp x,v , false positives fp x,v and false negatives fn x,v respectively as the sizes of the intersection P x,v ∩ R x , of the set difference P x,v \R x and of the set difference R x \P x,v . These data were combined into precision
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31865 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31865
and then averaged across the test set using the formulas
where m is the number of target proteins in the GO domain at hand and n is the number of those with at least one prediction scoring at least v. Finally, the average F-measure for the threshold v was calculated as
that is by taking the harmonic mean of p v and r v .
A complementary evaluation of function prediction quality was carried out on the top-ranked predictions for each target t and GO domain d. To this end, after ranking based on confidence scores, the initial predictions were trimmed to the same length l ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, n t,d }, where n t,d is the number of experimental annotations for t in the sub-ontology d. To handle ties in confidence scores, first 1,000 prediction lists of the desired length l were randomly sampled without replacement for each protein. Then, the average values of precision, recall, F-measure were calculated for each list of top l predictions; finally the average of such statistics over all replicates were analysed.
Along with the above statistics, the average sum of true positive information content was also calculated from all replicates. The information content of a GO term t was estimated in a Bayesian framework as proposed by Clark and Radivojac 36 using the equation
where P(t) represents the set of parent nodes of t, and the function N(·) returns for any set of GO terms the number of human proteins annotated in UniProtKB-SwissProt with evidence code EXP, IDA, IMP, IGI, IEP, TAS or IC. The Supplementary Data file 4 includes the complete sets of reference annotations and of predictions used in these performance comparison experiments.
Baseline function prediction methods. Naïve predictions were generated based on the frequency of the GO term annotations for human sequences recorded in UniProt-GOA as of 2013-10-28. To this end, initial counts were obtained for all GO terms except "protein binding" (GO:0005515) supported by the evidence codes EXP, IDA, IPI, IMP, IGI, IEP, IC and TAS. The data were then propagated following "is a" links in the GO released on 2013-11-05, and finally scaled between 0 and 1 for each domain separately, by dividing the final counts by the number of occurrences of the root node and rounding the result to three decimals like FFPred does. The resulting 6,504 pairs of GO terms (469 for CC, 1,268 for MF and 4,767 for BP) and scores were used to annotate all proteins in the benchmark set.
BLAST predictions were obtained by first collecting all BLAST 12 hits in the UniRef90 31 sequence database released in October 2013 with an E-value greater than 1e-03. Then the annotations in UniProtKB release 2013_10 supported by evidence code EXP, IDA, IPI, IMP, IGI, IEP, IC and TAS were transferred to the target sequences. GO term confidence scores were calculated by dividing the local alignment sequence identity by 100. When multiple BLAST hits were annotated with the same function, the highest score was retained.
Annotation and functional analysis of human splice variants. The sequences of the human isoform proteome and the classification between main and alternative splice variants were obtained from the release 2015_03 of UniProtKB/SwissProt and the accompanying "varsplic" file. Individual isoforms were discarded if a) their amino acid sequence is unknown; or b) it is shorter than 15 amino acids; or c) it is longer than 1500 amino acids, or d) it includes non-standard amino acid symbols; or e) it is recorded in a separate database entry due to substantial differences from the canonical sequence. When these filters led to the exclusion of main variants, associated alternative sequences were removed from the dataset as well. This initial screening yielded 28,310 splice variants for 9,267 UniProtKB/SwissProt entries.
FFPred 3 was run to make isoform-specific GO term predictions, which were then screened for consistency with the UniProtKB/SwissProt data. Only functional classes that were either explicitly assigned by the curators or implied by the GO data released on 2015-02-27 were retained. Removal of principal isoforms at this stage also led to the elimination of all related alternative variants, hence producing a final dataset P as consisting of 28,142 sequences for 9,214 UniProtKB/SwissProt entries.
Patterns of conservation and variation were analysed for all GO terms predicted to the splice isoforms of at least 20 distinct UniProtKB/SwissProt entries. For each functional class G, the survey aimed at quantifying its tendency to be conserved upon splicing, as well as its preference for principal rather than alternative splice variants. The average conservation of G across splice variants of the same gene was measured as the ratio between the number of UniProtKB/SwissProt entries where G was assigned to all isoforms, and the number of database records where it was predicted for at least one isoform. The primarity of G-that is its enrichment among main isoforms rather than alternative variants-was taken as where m G and a G are respectively the numbers of main and alternative isoforms annotated with G, while n = 9214 is the number of genes in the dataset, and m = 28142 is the total number of splice variants. Therefore, δ G > 0 if G is preferentially found among canonical isoform predictions; δ G < 0 if G is assigned more often to alternative variants than to main ones; and δ G = 0 if G is equally associated with the two sets of protein products.
To investigate further and interpret the conservation of each GO term g in the light of current biological knowledge, the biological attributes associated with the set of canonical and splicing variants annotated with g (V g ) were compared with those previously observed in the positive training set (T g ) of the corresponding SVM. In particular, for each sequence-derived feature f, the median value m g,f,T observed during the training process was compared to m g,f,V -the median value in V g -by first mapping the latter to the lowest percentile p g f T , , seen in T g and then by calculating
Therefore, E g,f = 0 if the two median values are identical, E g,f > 0 if on average f takes higher values in V g than in T g , while E g,f < 0 if f typically has lower values in V g than T g . Similarly, the association between a feature f and a functional class g that is over-represented in either set of canonical or alternative protein isoforms was estimated using Pearson's correlation coefficient between the values f takes on V g and the correspondin g SVM output scores.
Ascites, also called pulmonary hypertension syndrome, is a metabolic disorder in chickens. The disorder is associated with an insufficient pulmonary vascular capacity and results in right ventricular failure (Julian et al., 1987; Julian, 1998; Balog et al., 2000) . In most cases, ascites is caused by a disproportion between the oxygen requirement and the cardiovascular ability to supply oxygen (Julian and Mirsalimi, 1992; Scheele et al., 1992; Decuypere et al., 2000) . Oxygen shortage puts pressure on the pulmonary vascular system and can lead to oxygen deficiency in the tissues, which will increase pulmonary arterial pressure. The high blood pressure and high work load of the heart lead to fluid accumulation in the abdominal cavity and eventually death (Shlosberg et al., 1992; Decuypere et al., 2000; Havenstein et al., 2003) . Mortality caused by ascites ranges from 5 to 8% in populations worldwide and can be as great as 20 to 30% in heavier broiler flocks (Balog, 2003; Pavlidis et al., 2007) .
The increase in the occurrence of ascites has been linked to genetic selection for increased growth rate, greater meat yield, and lower feed conversion ratio (Decuypere et al., 2000; Balog, 2003) . It has been shown that fast-growing broilers are more susceptible to ascites than slow-growing broilers (Julian, 1993) . Ascites in broiler flocks can be reduced by management measures, such as avoiding low temperatures, maintaining good air quality and high oxygen concentrations, and restricting feeding to restrict growth (Decuypere et al., 2000; Julian, 2000; Balog, 2003) . A variety of physiological studies have evaluated specific traits as indicators for ascites susceptibility. Two of the most common clinical signs associated with ascites are right ventricular hypertrophy and fluid accumulation in the abdominal cavity (Decuypere et al., 2000; Moghadam et al., 2001; Balog et al., 2003; Pakdel et al., 2005a; Zerehdaran et al., 2006) . The ratio of right to total ventricular weight (RATIO), which measures right ventricular hypertrophy, has been suggested as a good indicator for ascites (Julian, 1993; McGovern et al., 1999; Pakdel et al., 2005c) .
Studies have shown genetic variation within lines (Wideman and French, 1999; Deeb et al., 2002; Pakdel et al., 2002) and between lines (Lubritz et al., 1995; Buys et al., 1999a,b; Wideman and French, 2000; De Greef et al., 2001; Druyan et al., 2007 Druyan et al., , 2008 for susceptibility to ascites. However, current indicator traits, such as RATIO and fluid accumulation in the abdominal cavity, can only be measured postmortem. Therefore, selection against ascites susceptibility by using these indicators is complicated, and information for selection relies heavily on information from relatives (McMillan and Quinton, 2002; Pakdel et al., 2005a) . Thus, there is a need for alternative indicator traits that can be measured on living birds; blood gas parameters might be a good alternative. It has been shown that broilers with right ventricular failure have significantly lower blood oxygen saturation (sO 2 ) compared with broilers with a normal heart (Julian and Mirsalimi, 1992) . Wideman et al. (2003) found that chickens with an elevated RATIO had a greater partial pressure of carbon dioxide in venous blood (pvCO 2 ), a lower partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood, and greater bicarbonate (HCO 3 ) concentrations in arterial blood compared with chickens with a normal RATIO. Furthermore, by comparing 2 different broiler lines, Scheele et al. (2003) observed a relationship between ascites susceptibility and high pvCO 2 at d 11 in juvenile chickens and suggested that ascites could be eliminated by selecting for low pvCO 2 . Navarro et al. (2006) demonstrated that sO 2 is heritable and suggested that ascites susceptibility could be decreased by selecting for increased sO 2 values. Druyan et al. (2007) reported a moderate heritability for sO 2 and indicated that sO 2 might serve as an indicator in selection against ascites susceptibility, although with limited efficacy.
In addition to the studies by Navarro et al. (2006) and Druyan et al. (2007) , to our knowledge, no other studies have reported heritability estimates for blood gas parameters. Furthermore, to our knowledge, only Druyan et al. (2007) reported genetic correlations between blood gas parameters and other ascites indicator traits such as RATIO.
The objective of the present study was to estimate heritability, heart ratio, and genetic and phenotypic correlations between blood gas parameters measured during wk 3 and 4 and BW at 2 different ages in broilers.

Animal Material. The experiment was carried out by licensed and authorized personnel under approval of Hendrix Genetics. The experimental population consisted of 5,987 broilers. The chickens were from generations 7 and 8 of an advanced intercross line, which was a cross between 2 genetically different dam lines originating from the White Plymouth Rock breed. The data consisted of 2,413 males, 2,452 females, and 1,122 chickens of unknown gender. Birds from generations 3 of this population have been used in previous studies on ascites and meat quality traits (van Kaam et al., 1998; Pakdel et al., 2002) . The chickens in the experiment were kept under a cold temperature regimen to induce ascites. The temperature was 30°C at the time of hatching and was gradually reduced to 10°C at 22 d of age. The temperature remained at 10°C until the end of the experiment when the chickens were 5 wk of age. The chickens were group housed with 20 birds/m 2 , they had ad libitum access to a commercial broiler feed containing 12,970 KJ/kg, and they were exposed to 23 h of light per day during the entire experiment. Except for the temperature schedule applied, the chickens were kept under conditions that closely resemble commercial practice.
Venous blood samples were taken when the chickens were, on average, 22 d old (ranging from 19 to 27 d old). The blood gas parameters measured (GEM Premier 3000, Instrumentation Laboratories, Lexington, MA) were blood pH, pvCO 2 , and partial pressure of oxygen in venous blood (pvO 2 ). Bicarbonate and total carbon dioxide content (TCO 2 ) were calculated from the pH and pvCO 2 by the following equations:
Log HCO 3 = pH + log pvCO 2 − 7.608, and TCO 2 = HCO 3 + 0.03 pvCO 2 .
Blood sO 2 is an indicator of the percentage of hemoglobin saturated with oxygen at the time of the measurement; pvO 2 , pH, and HCO 3 were used to calculate sO 2 with the following equation: 
. The weight of the heart ventricles was determined at 5 wk of age. The RATIO was the weight of the right ventricle as a percentage of the total ventricle weight (TV). The chickens were weighed at 2 wk (BW 2 ) and 5 wk of age (BW 5 ). No postmortem dissection was performed on the animals that died before the end of the experiment; therefore, the cause of death was unknown.
Animals that died before the end of the experiment were assigned a total mortality (MORT-TOT) score of 1 and birds that survived got a score of 0.
Statistical Analysis. Genetic parameter estimates were obtained by using ASREML software (Gilmour et al., 2006) . To determine the importance of maternal effects, a model without a maternal effect and a model with a maternal environmental effect were used. The following model without a maternal environmental effect was used:
where y ijkl is the dependent variable of chicken ijkl of sex i , which is the fixed effect of sex (i = female, male, or unknown); IHD j is the fixed effect of individual hatching day (j = 1, 2, . . ., 34 d at hatching); date k is the fixed effect for date of blood gas measurement (k = 1, 2, . . ., 37); a l is the random direct genetic effect of individual l with a~N(0,A ); a 2 and e ijkl is the random residual effect with e~N(0,I ).
The effect date k was used only in the model for the blood gas parameters.
The second model with a maternal environmental effect was
This model is identical to the first model, except for the random maternal environmental effect of dam m (d m ) with d~N(0,I ). To test the significance of the maternal environmental effect, a likelihood ratio test with 1 df was used: Some of the animals died before the end of the experiment and had an observation for only BW 2 . The animals that died might have been the ones that were most susceptible to ascites, and this selection might have had an impact on the estimated genetic parameters. Selection related to BW 2 can be accounted for by performing a multivariate analysis including BW 2 (Ouweltjes et al., 1988) . Therefore, we also estimated heritabilities by using a bivariate analysis with BW 2 as a permanent trait. The effect of selection on genetic correlations was studied by performing a trivariate analysis with BW 2 as a permanent trait.

Means, SD, and CV of the traits measured under cold stress conditions are presented in Table 1 . Of the 5,987 chickens retained for measurement of BW 2 , 5,222 also had measurements for BW 5 , 5,155 had measurements for RATIO, and 2,956 chickens were used for measuring blood gas parameters. Mortality recordings were missing for 210 chickens because of the loss of wing bands or because the trait was not recorded.
The average venous blood pH was 7.38, the average sO 2 was 84%, the average pvCO 2 was 45.4 mmHg, and the average HCO 3 concentration was 26.88 mmol/L (Table 1 ). The average BW of broilers under cold stress conditions was 360 g at 2 wk and 1,146 g at 5 wk, and the average RATIO was 25%. The MORT-TOT was 10%. Coefficients of variation were moderate to high for most of the traits (e.g., 14.6% for pvCO 2 , 20% for pvO 2 , 29.4% for BW 2 , 18.9% for BW 5 , and 21.2% for RATIO). However, the CV for pH was very low (0.7%). 
Phenotypic variance, heritability, and maternal environmental effects for the ascites-related traits obtained from the univariate models are given in Table 2 . The heritability for RATIO was 0.43. For some of the blood gas parameters, the heritabilities were close to zero: 0.02 for pvCO 2 , 0.03 for pvO 2 , and 0.07 for sO 2 . However, for pH, HCO 3 , and TCO 2, moderate heritabilities were found: 0.15, 0.19, and 0.19, respectively. The estimated heritabilities for the 2 BW measurements were 0.15 for BW 2 and 0.17 for BW 5 .
The traits BW 2 , BW 5 , TV, pvCO 2 , and MORT-TOT were significantly affected by maternal environmental effects. The fraction of the total variation explained by maternal environmental effects was 0.05 for pvCO 2 , 0.12 for BW 2 , and 0.07 for BW 5 . No significant evidence for the presence of maternal environmental effects was found for the traits RATIO, pH, pvO 2 , HCO 3 , TCO 2 , and sO 2 . Using a model without a maternal effect gave a heritability estimate of 0.51 for BW 2 , of 0.37 for BW 5 , and of 0.15 for pvCO 2 (Table 2) . Bivariate analysis with BW 2 as a permanent trait resulted in slightly greater heritability estimates; they were at maximum 0.03 greater than the heritabilities estimated by using a univariate model (results not shown). The heritability estimates for MORT-TOT were also analyzed by using a binary model (results not shown), and the results increased compared with heritabilities estimated from the linear model. These results were in agreement with heritabilities estimated by transforming the heritabilities from the linear model to the underlying scale (Lynch and Walsh, 1998) .
The estimates for genetic correlations (above the diagonal) and the phenotypic correlations (below the diagonal) of the blood gas parameters RATIO, BW, and MORT-TOT are presented in Table 3 . The greatest genetic correlation between RATIO as a postmortem indicator for ascites and blood gas parameters was found for pvO 2 (−0.62 ± 0.21). However, genetic correlations between pvO 2 and other traits have high SE, mainly because of the low heritability for pvO 2 . The genetic correlations between RATIO and the blood gas parameters TCO 2 (0.31 ± 0.15) and HCO 3 (0.31 ± 0.15) were positive and moderate. For pvCO 2 and RATIO, the genetic correlation was close to zero (−0.04 ± 0.45). The genetic correlation between BW 2 and RATIO was 0.19, whereas the genetic correlation between BW 5 and RA-TIO was −0.18. The genetic correlation between BW 2 and BW 5 was high (0.88). Phenotypic correlations between traits were, in general, similar to the genetic correlations. A trivariate model with BW 2 as a permanent trait had hardly any effect on the estimated genetic correlation between the traits: genetic correlations between RATIO and the blood gas parameters increased from 0.01 to 0.02 when using a trivariate model instead of a bivariate model (results not shown).
The objective of the present study was to estimate the heritability and genetic and phenotypic correlations between blood gas parameters measured at an average age of 22 d, BW at 2 different ages, and heart ratio in broilers. Body weight and RATIO were measured on 5,987 birds, and the blood gas parameters were measured on a subset of 2,956 birds. The study was performed under cold stress conditions to stimulate the metabolic rate resulting in an increased requirement for oxygen, which is known to increase the incidence of ascites in chickens (Decuypere et al., 2000) . To evaluate whether specific blood gas parameters could be used in selecting against ascites susceptibility, we studied the heritability and genetic correlations with RATIO.
Previous studies have indicated that correlations between BW and ascites traits are dependent on the frequency of ascitic birds in the population, and there- 1 BW 2 = BW at 2 wk; BW 5 = BW at 5 wk; RATIO = ratio of right to total ventricular weight; RV = right ventricular weight; TV = total ventricular weight; pvCO 2 = partial pressure of carbon dioxide in venous blood; pvO 2 = partial pressure of oxygen in venous blood; HCO 3 = bicarbonate; TCO 2 = total carbon dioxide in venous blood; sO 2 = oxygen saturation in venous blood; MORT-TOT = total mortality. fore on the severity of the challenge (De Greef et al., 2001; Zerehdaran et al., 2006 ). In the current study, the average MORT-TOT was 10%. In comparison with the MORT-TOT of 16% found by Pakdel et al. (2002) under cold conditions, the mortality in the present study was not very high. However, mortality was much greater than the 4 to 5% mortality found in chickens reared under normal commercial conditions (Pakdel et al., 2002) . In the study by Pakdel et al. (2002) , an average RATIO of 28% was found, which is greater than the average value of 25% that was obtained in the current study. Julian et al. (1987) suggested that a RATIO of greater than 25% indicates susceptibility to ascites. This threshold would imply that, in our experiment, 45% of the birds showed signs of ascites. The BW 5 in the present study was also lower than under commercial conditions. This suppressed growth rate was likely due to the cold stress conditions under which the birds were kept.
In the current study, the average pvCO 2 was 45.4 mmHg. Scheele et al. (2003) found an average pvCO 2 at 3 wk of age of 53.8 mmHg in a high-risk broiler line and an average pvCO 2 of 43.9 mmHg in a low-risk line. Interestingly, however, the pvO 2 was lower (44.6 mmHg for the high-risk line and 46.9 mmHg for the low-risk line) than in the current study (52.46 mmHg). However, it should be noted that Scheele et al. (2003) used only male broilers, whereas in the current study, the average measurements were based on results from both males and females. In addition, the previous study compared ascites susceptibility between 2 genetically different stocks (high-and low-risk lines), whereas the current study investigated ascites susceptibility within one crossed line.
It can be concluded that birds in the current study were kept under circumstances that caused a mild increase in ascites. Because estimates of genetic parameters depend on the severity of the challenge (De Greef et al., 2001; Zerehdaran et al., 2006) , the estimates presented in this study should be interpreted in this context. Pakdel et al. (2005c) found a negative genetic correlation between BW 5 and RATIO (−0.27). This is consistent with the negative genetic correlation (−0.18) found between RATIO and BW 5 in the present study. A positive genetic correlation (0.19) was observed between RATIO and BW 2 . These results suggest that susceptible chickens tend to have a greater BW early in life (BW 2 ) and a lower BW later in life (BW 5 ). These results are in agreement with the general finding that correlations between traits are dependent on the frequency of ascitic birds in the population.

A maternal environmental effect may influence the phenotype of the individual, which, in case these effects play a role, should be accounted for in the statistical analysis (Clément et al., 2001 ). In the current study, noticeable changes were found in the heritabilities for TV, pvCO 2 , and MORT-TOT when the maternal environmental effect was included in the model. De Smit et al. (2008) showed that ascites resistance is related to several physiological variables at the embryonic stage, which suggests that maternal effects might play a role in susceptibility. Several studies have reported a maternal effect for BW (Koerhuis and Thompson, 1997; van Kaam et al., 1998; Pakdel et al., 2002) . Pakdel et al. (2002) found a significant maternal effect for RATIO, which could not be confirmed in the present study. Navarro et al. (2006) found little evidence for maternal (environmental) effects on sO 2 ; of the 4 broiler lines investigated, one of them exhibited significant evidence for the presence of maternal effects. In that line, maternal environmental effects explained approximately 2% of the total variance. In the present study, we did not find significant maternal effects on sO 2 ; however, a significant maternal effect was found for pvCO 2 , which explains 5% of the phenotypic variation.
In the present study, we evaluated the suitability of blood gas parameters as indicator traits for ascites based on heritabilities and correlations with RATIO. For some of the blood gas parameters, heritabilities were close to zero (pvCO 2 , pvO 2 , and sO 2 ), whereas for others, they were moderate (pH, HCO 3 , and TCO 2 ). The heritability estimate for sO 2 was in agreement with results by Navarro et al. (2006) ; however, in that study, sO 2 was measured on 6-wk-old chickens that were not cold stressed. This might have affected the heritability estimates. Druyan et al. (2007) reported a considerably greater heritability estimate (0.49 ± 0.23) for sO 2 in chickens that were 7 d old. However, this estimate is not significantly different from the heritability estimate reported in the present study. The low heritabilities indicate that accurate estimates of breeding values for these traits cannot be obtained based on single observations. Accuracies might be improved by using repeated observations, but this will depend on the repeatability of the traits. Repeatability could not be estimated based on the present data; therefore, this is still an option that can be explored. In addition to high heritability, a suitable indicator trait should also have a high genetic correlation with ascites susceptibility. This was evaluated by studying correlations with RATIO. Several authors have suggested that RATIO is a good indicator trait for ascites susceptibility (Lubritz et al., 1995; Pakdel et al., 2002 Pakdel et al., , 2005b . Julian et al. (1987) recommended the use of RATIO as an objective method for assessing right ventricular failure, and therefore of diagnosing ascites. However, others have questioned whether RATIO is a good indicator trait for birds kept under normal conditions (i.e., conditions that do not stimulate ascites; Pavlidis et al., 2007) . In the present study, birds were kept under cold stress conditions. Genetic correlations between RATIO and both HCO 3 and TCO 2 were moderate, and correlations between RATIO and pH or pvCO 2 were close to zero. The correlation between RATIO and pvO 2 was −0.62; however, the estimated heritability for pvO 2 was very low, resulting in very high SE for the genetic correlations with this trait. Therefore, results from the present study suggest that blood gas parameters are not useful as indicators for ascites susceptibility when measured at an average age of 22 d.
Experimental results from juvenile chickens (Korte et al., 1999; Scheele et al., 2003) showed that at the age of 11 d, a high pvCO 2 is associated with a greater incidence of ascites at the age of 5 to 7 wk. Scheele et al. (2005) stated that genetic selection for low pvCO 2 values at 11 d of age will be an effective method of reducing the occurrence of the ascites syndrome. However, results from the present study do not confirm this. The first explanation for the discrepancy between results from the present study and results by Scheele et al. (2003 Scheele et al. ( , 2005 may be the different ages of the chickens at which the blood gas parameters were measured. The pulmonary pressure index values are known to change rapidly over the first 2 wk of the life of a chicken. Particularly during the period of juvenile growth, the metabolic rate is high and these conditions impose greater metabolic demands. The increased metabolism requires high O 2 intake and, at the same time, high maintenance requirements. These factors lead to the maximal potential delivery capacity of oxygen in the respiratory and cardiovascular systems, which is then exceeded and triggers the events that lead to ascites (Decuypere et al., 2000) . In the current study, the blood gas parameters were measured when the chickens were, on average, 22 d old. However, in the study by Scheele et al. (2005) , the differences in pvCO 2 values between the lines remained consistent until the end of the experiment, but did increase as the chickens became older. The pvO 2 values decreased as the chickens aged, and the differences between the mean pvO 2 values in the 2 lines became greater (Scheele et al., 2003) . It should be mentioned that the severity of the challenge differed between the study by Scheele et al. (2003 Scheele et al. ( , 2005 and the current study. In the current study, the temperature was gradually reduced to 10°C at 22 d of age, whereas Scheele et al. (2003 Scheele et al. ( , 2005 gradually reduced the temperature to 15°C at 16 d of age. Although this did not result in a greater mortality, it is possible that even ascites-resistant broilers experienced problems with breathing because of the low temperature. This might have had an effect on the blood gas parameter values. The second explanation could be the lines that were used. Scheele et al. (2003) compared ascites susceptibility between 2 genetically different stocks (high-and low-risk lines), and several different lines were compared in the other study (Scheele et al., 2005) , whereas in the current study, ascites susceptibility was investigated within one crossed line. A third explanation could be the fact that only males were used by Scheele et al. (2003 Scheele et al. ( , 2005 , whereas both males and females were used in the current study. The female growth rate is slower than the male growth rate; thus, ascites-susceptible females will have a lower pvCO 2 , on average. Therefore, differences in pvCO 2 between healthy and affected chickens will be smaller. Although previous studies (Scheele et al., 2003 (Scheele et al., , 2005 reported the use of pvCO 2 as an indicator trait for ascites susceptibility in male broilers, the results from the current study do not support this. It might be concluded that the severity of the challenge, the genetic lines used, the sex of the chickens, and the time of measurement are critical factors.
The estimated heritabilities for the blood gas parameters pvCO 2 and pvO 2 were almost zero. This indicates that selection based on single measurements of these blood gas parameters is not feasible. The heritabilities of HCO 3 and TCO 2 showed enough variation in the population to be used for selection. However, the low genetic correlation between RATIO and these 2 blood gas parameters suggests that they are not useful as indicators for ascites susceptibility. Therefore, the current data suggest that blood gas parameters measured at an average age of 22 d will not be very effective when used for selecting against susceptibility.
In many developing countries, including Tanzania, estimates on the magnitude of and trends on the HIV epidemic are obtained through HIV seroprevalence surveys conducted over a period of time [1] . These surveys are primarily conducted using sentinel and general population. HIV seroprevalence targeting the general population allows more accurate estimation of the national HIV prevalence than traditional sentinel surveillance, and have been of useful value in assessing the scale of epidemics worldwide [2] [3] [4] . Despite that sentinel surveillance remains the main instrument in estimating HIV prevalence in many developing countries due to financial and logistical reasons. In Tanzania the most frequently used sentinel populations are women attending antenatal clinics (ANCs) and persons attending clinics for routine diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) [5] [6] [7] . Apart from these surveys, the country has also conducted household surveys to monitor HIV infection and behavioral risks factors in general population [8] [9] [10] . Results from various surveys have reported varying trends of both HIV and other sexual transmission diseases [8, 11, 12] .
In Tanzania the last round of ANC HIV and syphilis surveillance was conducted in 2007 (reference). This has left a gap regarding the dynamics of HIV and syphilis infections among pregnant women attending ANC clinics in Tanzania. Therefore, in 2011 the National AIDS Control Programme (NACP) decided to conduct a country-wide surveillance to estimate the prevalence of HIV and syphilis among pregnant women attending ANC in Tanzania. The ultimate goal was to provide important information for program planning and evaluation of various interventions taken by the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania and other stakeholders, including development partners.

A total of 133 ANC (44 health centres, 48 dispensaries, 24 hospitals and 17 reproductive and child health clinics) were selected from all 21 regions of mainland Tanzania. In most regions two sites were purposively selected from urban, semi-urban and rural settings except for Dar es Salaam (the capital city), in which all the selected sites were classified as urban. ANC sites were considered for selection if they could enroll at least 120 pregnant women during the three consecutive months of data collection. In total, 46 sites were located in urban (city and/or town at the regional headquarters), 40 in semi-urban (district headquarters, country borders, or towns situated along major roads), and 47 in rural (remote areas where communities either farm or keep livestock) areas.
The surveillance population included all pregnant women of all ages attending a selected sentinel ANC site for the first time at any pregnancy during survey period between September and December 2011.
About 3-5 ml of whole blood was collected from each woman in an Ethylenediamine Tetra acetate (EDTA) vacutainer tube for routine syphilis testing. In addition, a drop of blood (≈100 μl) was used to prepare DBS specimens for HIV surveillance purposes. The DBS cards were left overnight to dry at room temperature. The same surveillance number was also written on the surveillance data collection form. At this point, the upper part of the surveillance data collection form that contained the woman's clinic card number was torn up and discarded in order to ensure de-linking of the client identifier from the respective HIV data that was documented on the surveillance data collection form.
Dried DBS cards were stacked between weighing paper and stored in zip-locked plastic bags with desiccant (drying) packets and a humidity indicator card together with their completed data collection forms. Desiccant packs were changed when humidity indicator cards changed color from blue to pink. On weekly basis using courier service, ANC survey staff mailed completed data collection forms and DBS samples to their assigned zonal laboratory. From zonal laboratory specimens were transported to the Department of Microbiology and Immunology at Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences (MUHAS) for testing.
Surveillance staff recorded social and demographic details of the women at the site. The recorded information included age, marital status, parity, educational level and duration of stay at present residence.
Testing for syphilis infection was done on site using rapid plasma reagin (RPR), which is a routine test for syphilis infection among ANC attendees in Tanzania. In the majority of rural sites nurses at ANC clinics performed the test, whereas in most of the urban and semiurban sites laboratory staff performed tests. Results were recorded directly on the data collection form and on the woman's clinic card or laboratory investigation request form. Women whose RPR test results positive were offered treatment based on the National sexual transmitted infections (STIs) Treatment Guidelines [13] .
HIV testing and quality assurance 
Because syphilis screening is already routinely conducted as per the guidelines of the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MOHSW) and HIV testing was performed on non-linked samples, informed consent was not warranted. There were no direct benefits or risks to participating in the survey, and data was de-identified before analysis to protect client confidentiality. Before actual protocol implementation, the National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR) approved the ANC surveillance protocol (reference number NIMR/HQ/R.8C/Vol 1/43).
Data analysis was performed using Stata v.12 software (Stata Corporation, College Station, Texas, USA). Association between HIV and syphilis infections with variables were determined through univariate and multivariate logistic regression and expressed through odds ratio and 95 % confidence interval. Factors that were found to be significant in the univariate logistic regression analysis were used in the multivariate logistic regression and a p-value less than 0.05 was considered to be significant.

A total of 39,698 pregnant women, equivalent to 2.4 % of estimated 1.68 million women attending ANC in Mainland Tanzania were enrolled. The number of women enrolled varied by region, ranging from 867 in Mtwara to 3780 in Dar es Salaam (Table 1) , while the percentage of those enrolled ranged from 1.2 % in Kagera to 5.1 % in Arusha.
HIV prevalence in association with socio-demographic characteristics of the ANC attendees Among 39,698 pregnant women enrolled in the surveillance, majority (87 %) were married and nearly half (48.7 %) were aged between 15-24 years. About 41.3 % had 1-2 previous pregnancies and most women (51.4 %) were from urban areas, and over two thirds (68.6 %) had primary education.
The overall prevalence of HIV was 5.6 % (95 % CI: 5.4, 5.8). Single women (6.8 %) were at more risk of being HIV infected than married women (5.4 %) (cOR = 1.28, 95 % CI: 1.13-1.45; p < 0.05) and divorced women (5.1 %) ( Table 2) . Women aged 25-34 (cOR = 1.97, 95 % CI: 1.79-2.16; p < 0.05) and those older than 35 (cOR = 1.88, 95 % CI: 1.62-2.17; p < 0.05) had increased risk of being HIV infected compared to age group 15-24 years. Women with 1-2 previous pregnancies (cOR = 1.94, 95 % CI 1.71-2.19); p < 0.05) and those with 3-4 previous pregnancies (cOR = 2.19, 95 % CI 1.92-2.59; p < 0.05) had significantly greater likelihood of being HIV infected compared to those who had more than 5 pregnancies (cOR = 1.23, 95 % CI 1.02-1.48); p = 0.07). The likelihood of being HIV infected was significantly less frequent among women residing in rural areas (3.13 %) (cOR = 0.46, 95 % CI 0.4-0.52; p < 0.05) and semi-urban areas (5.82 %) (cOR = 0.88, 95 % CI 0.8-0.96, p < 0.05) compared to urban areas (6.59 %). There was no statistically significant difference in the risk of HIV with education and duration of stay in residence.
On performing multivariate analysis after adjusting for potential confounding, the risk of HIV infection remained significantly high in the 25-34 year-old age group (aOR = 1.90, 95 % CI 1.70-2.13: P < 0.05) and in women older than 35 years (aOR = 2.30, 95 % CI 1.93-2.76; p < 0.05 compared to 15-24 years. Other independent factors of HIV infection were being single and having 1-2 (aOR = 1.50, 95 % CI 1.17-1.92; P < 0.05) and 3-4 previous pregnancies (aOR = 1.7, 95 % 1.27-2.29; p < 0.05) ( Table 2) , while those attending rural ANC clinics had a decreased risk of HIV infection (adOR = 0.48, 95 % CI 0.42-0.56; p < 0.05).
The overall syphilis prevalence was 2.5 % (956/38,920) (95 % CI: 2.3-3.6). The risk of syphilis infection was higher among women having 3-4 pregnancies (cOR = 1.94, 95 % CI: 1.60-2.35; p < 0.05) and >5 pregnancies (cOR = 2.48; 95 % CI 2-3.08; p < 0.05) as compared to 1-2 previous pregnancies (cOR = 1.23, 95 % CI 1.03-1.48; p = 0.06). Other characteristics significantly associated with syphilis were (Table 3) . After adjusting for potential confounding, the likelihood of syphilis remained significantly higher among women having more than three previous pregnancies, and those who were attending semi-urban and rural ANC clinics.
The prevalence of HIV infection ranged from 1. (Table 4) , whereas syphilis infection ranged from 0.4 % in Arusha to 6.7 % in Mwanza. In almost all regions, the 2011 HIV prevalence among ANC attendees is comparable to that of women from 2011/2012THMIS with minor variations, and both were higher than that of men and close to the general HIV prevalence (including men and women aged 15-49 years), Table 5 .
Apparently, there was no clear association in the occurrence of the two infections. For example, while the prevalence of HIV infection in Iringa region was 14.82 % that of syphilis was only 1.91 %. Similarly, the prevalence of HIV infection in Mbeya region was 11.31 %, while that of syphilis was 2.2 %. 

The 2011 ANC surveillance results shows that the overall prevalence of HIV infection was 5.6 % (95 % CI: 5.4, 5.8 %) while that of syphilis was 2.5 % (95 % CI: 2.3, 3.6 %). The observed HIV prevalence in this study was lower than the previous 2007/08 Tanzania ANC surveillance data (7 %) [14] and 2011/2012 Tanzania HIV-AIDS malaria indicator survey (THMS) (6 %) [8, 11, 14, 15] and a recent THMS survey [9] ( Table 5 ). The NACP needs to investigate the possible reasons for persistently high prevalence of HIV infection in these regions. Our survey also showed HIV prevalence varied by residence with 3.1 %, 5.8 % and 6.6 % for rural, semi-urban and urban clinic attendees respectively, an observation which is in consistent with previous and recent reports from Tanzania [11, 13, 16] . These observed differences are probably due to differences in social-economic activities and level of wealth in urban versus semi-urban and rural areas [17, 18] as well as round sexual networks and prevalence of sex work in urban and semi-urban areas.
In this survey, the risk of HIV infection significantly increased with age above 25 years, being highest (7.3 %) in women aged 25-34 years, followed by 35 years and above (7 %); finding which is in agreement with previous studies in Tanzania [11, 12] , and elsewhere in Africa [19] . We also found relatively low risk of HIV infection among young women with no history of previous pregnancies compare to those 1-4 previous pregnancies ( Table 2 ). The relatively low HIV prevalence (3.9 %) among women aged between 15-24years may signify a reduction in the number of new infections [20] , however this need to be substantiated by trend analysis studies. Women who reported single marital status (6.8 %) had significantly increased risk of HIV as compared to married women (5.4 %), an observation which is in keeping with the previous studies and ANC surveillance reports [11, 14, 15, 21] . Other reports in Tanzania have found highest HIV prevalence among married women or formerly married women [8, 13] . Such variations may imply that marital status per se is not an indicator of sexual activity and hence risk for HIV infection, which underlines the need to involve men in the control of HIV infection [22] . Notably, the risk of HIV infection decreased significantly with being in rural area as compared to semiurban and urban areas is consistent with past and recent studies [11, 14, 23] . However these geographical differences seem to be decreasing.
In general, our results show significant regional and rural/semi-urban/urban variations in HIV prevalence. Therefore there is a need for national-wide scaling PMTCT services within RCH clinics. All ANC clinics should be able to provide PMTCT option B+ which require women and their infants to receive a cascade of interventions including uptake of antenatal services and HIV testing during pregnancy, use of antiretroviral treatment (ART) by pregnant women living with HIV, safe childbirth practices and appropriate infant feeding, uptake of infant HIV testing and other post-natal healthcare services [24] . The issues and challenges which have been identified to hamper the promotion of PMTCT such as stigma, male involvement, infant feeding options and decision making, home deliveries, and access to upto-date information on PMTCT should be addressed in order to ensure uptake and utilization of PMTCT services [25, 26] .
The only factors that were associated with risk for syphilis were living in a rural or semi-urban area and having 1 to 4 previous numbers of pregnancies. Our finding of high burden of syphilis in rural and semi-urban areas is similar to what has been reported in studies from SubSaharan Africa and China [12, [27] [28] [29] . The high burden of syphilis among the rural and semi-urban population in Tanzania may be partially explained by the relatively poor treatment access as well as data quality. In rural settings syphilis testing was done by ANC nurses, whom may be less skilled than laboratory technicians who performed the test in urban testing. The RPR is a macroscopic flocculation tests and requires no microscope, but has the potential for false-negative results due to prozone reactions. For many years surveillance of syphilis in Tanzania has based on RPR, which is (non-treponemal) which are not specific and may therefore provide some false positive or negative results. We are therefore advocating use of rapid point-of-care (RPOC) tests as a new approach to ensuring that diagnosis and treatment of syphilis is timely across the diverse geographic and social settings in the country. The RPOC tests should be able to detect recent, as distinct from past treated infections.
Apparently, there was no clear correlation in the occurrence of the two infections in the different regions. For example, while the prevalence of HIV infection in Iringa region was 14.82 % that of syphilis was only 1.91 %. Similarly, the prevalence of HIV infection in Mbeya region was 11.31 %, while that of syphilis was 2.2 %. On the other hand, Mwanza region which had the highest prevalence of syphilis (6.7 %), had a rather modest prevalence of HIV infection (4.2 %). Tabora region which had syphilis prevalence of 3.07 % had a HIV prevalence of 4.74 %.
Possible explanations for lack of correlation could be part to the use of non-treponemal test for diagnosis of syphilis where my overestimate or underestimate the true case of syphilis.
The strength of our study is in Tanzania~94 % of pregnant women make at least one antenatal care (ANC) visit [30] , therefore there was a good representation data of ANC attendees which can provide a reasonable estimate of HIV and syphilis prevalence within the general population.
However, compared to population survey ANC surveillance have several limitations including is limited by geographical coverage because sampling is often not representative of smaller and more remote areas in a country, only women of certain social economic status attend the clinics, and do not provide information on women who are not pregnant or sexually active and who do not attend public health clinics and it lacks information on men [3, 31, 32] . In our study, these limitations were minimized by selecting 133 health facilities from all regions in Tanzania mainland and from each region at least 2 ANC clinics were selected from rural, semi-urban and urban areas.
Fortunately, Tanzania has opportunity of both ANC sentinel surveillance and population surveys that can complement information thereby providing clear picture of HIV infection. We therefore advocate use of both datasets for in-depth analysis of national HIV epidemic.
The overall prevalence of HIV infection (5.6 %) and syphilis (2.5 %) found among pregnant women attending ANC clinics in Tanzania calls for further strengthening of current intervention measures, which include scaling up the integration of prevention of mother to child transmission (PMTCT) services in Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) clinics. The issues and challenges which have been identified to hamper the promotion of PMTCT such as stigma, male involvement, infant feeding options and decision making, home deliveries, and access to up-to-date information on PMTCT should be addressed in order to ensure uptake and utilization of PMTCT services.
There are at least two distinct patterns of reaction in the peripheral nerves in cases of peripheral neuropathy. Axonal degeneration or segmental demyelination (or both) may occur and their histological appearances are now well known. Disorders associated with primary destruction of axis cylinders include the classical example of Wallerian degeneration, and the latter, sometimes termed 'Schwann cell diseases', includes the neuropathies of diabetes mellitus and metachromatic leucodystrophy (Dayan, 1967) .
We have recently studied one family in which peripheral neuropathy has occurred in members of three generations, and another unrelated family only one member of which was definitely affected. Nerve biopsies from both families have shown both axonal destruction and segmental demyelination associated with unique features of Schwann cell dysfunction.
Under local anaesthesia, a sural nerve and peroneus brevis muscle were biopsied. For light microscopy they were fixed in buffered formol saline and paraffin and frozen sections cut and stained by conventional methods. Isolated fibres were 'teased' from the nerve by freehand dissection after post-fixation in 10% osmic acid and maceration in 60% glycerine (Dayan, 1967) . The internodal lengths and diameters of such fibres were measured directly with a micrometer eyepiece at magnifications of x 100 and x 950 respectively. Part of the sural nerve of Case 1 was post-fixed in 1 % osmic acid and the number of myelinated fibres and their diameters were measured directly in transverse sections at a magnification of x 950, with the aid of a Fleming Particle Size Micrometer and Analyser, Type 526 (Fleming Instrument Co. Ltd., Stevenage, U.K.).
For electron microscopy, small pieces of nerve were post-fixed in buffered osmic acid and embedded in Epikote. Ultra-thin sections stained with lead citrate and uranyl acetate were examined in an AEI 'EM6' electron microscope. FAMILY HISTORY This is shown in Figure 1 . The index patient (III.9), of our study, had three live children, one of whom (IV.7), was also affected and forms Case 2 of this report.
The mother (II.8) of the propositus was 85 years old when examined and considered herself to be in good health, although for many years her feet 'turned in' when she walked.
On examination of the cranial nerves she had bilateral nerve deafness. A semi-quantitative analysis of the relationship between internodal lengths and diameter of individual fibres is shown in Fig. 6 , displayed by the convention of Fullerton, Gilliatt, Lascelles, and Morgan-Hughes (1965 It shows a wide scatter of segmental lengths most of which are much shorter than the normal value for fibres of that particular diameter. Some fibres contained some short segments and others of normal length. These changes are characteristic of segmental de-and remyelination and of regeneration after axonal degeneration Thomas and Lascelles, 1966) . and their associated myelin sheaths were seen, in many fields the sheaths were abnormal (Fig. 7b) develop normally for the first few months of his life. However, motor development was retarded and when he began to walk at the age of 13 months it was noticed that his right foot would frequently 'turn in' when he stood on it. He has needed calipers for walking since the age of 18 months. Examination showed a young child of normal habitus except for marked wasting of the legs below the knees. His hands, arms, trunk, and girdle muscles appeared normal. He had weakness of all muscle groups in his legs which were flaccid. The motor weakness was most severe distally with, for example, foot drop and only slight weakness of the quadriceps. There was pes cavus deformity of both feet. Tendon reflexes seemed normal in the arms, but could not be elicited in the legs. Sensation appeared normal in the arms, but there was undoubted hypoaesthesia in the legs below knee level, with diminished perception of vibration, joint position, heat and cold. Peripheral nerves did not feel thickened.
Conduction velocities in the right median nerve (15 m/sec) in the forearm and in the right lateral popliteal nerve (10 m/sec) were very slow.
Laboratory investigations were all normal including full blood count, liver function tests, and estimation of serum proteins. Phytanic acid was not detected in his serum (Professor J. N. Cumings).
Biopsy was attempted of the right sural nerve but only a small fascicle of it was obtained. The peroneus brevis muscle was also biopsied.
HISTOLOGICAL FINDINGS (a) Nerve It was only possible to prepare paraffin sections in which the myelin sheaths appeared normal and one degenerating axis cylinder was found (Fig. 8) .
(b) Peroneus brevis muscle This appeared normal. FAMILY HISTORY Both parents of the patient were said to be normal and so were his brother (his only sib), his wife, and both of his children, although the youngest, now aged 2 years, has not yet learned to walk.
PAST HISTORY His birth was difficult and he was cyanosed for a while. There appeared to be no immediate sequelae of this, but he did not learn to walk until he was 5 years old and his hands were weak and clumsy. These symptoms were unchanged when he was examined at the age of 11 years. At that time there was generalized weakness of the thighs and lower legs and he walked with a steppage gait. Hand muscles also were weak and wasted, but other muscle groups appeared normal. All tendon reflexes were absent and the plantar responses were flexor. No sensory abnormalities were found. PRESENT CONDITION The patient was not seen again until February 1968, aged 26 years, when he thought his condition has been unchanged for some time. Although his hands and legs were still weak, he could run, swim, ride a bicycle, and was employed as an engineeringfitter. In September 1966 he had first noticed tingling and numbness of the tips of his fingers which made him drop things. The numbness had developed over a few weeks and had since persisted unchanged. There had been no sensory symptoms in the feet.
On examination in May 1967, there was impaired sensation to touch and pain in all the fingers to the level of the palms, and wasting of the small muscles of the hands. The hip flexors were weak and so were the extensors and flexors of the toes. The tendon reflexes and plantar responses could not be elicited. The calf and hand muscles were tender.
Electrophysiological studies showed very slow conduction velocities in both the right and left ulnar nerves (21 and 23 m/sec respectively). The left median nerve was inexcitable. In the hand muscles and anterior tibial muscles electromyography showed fibrillation potentials at rest and a reduced interference pattern on volition.
Lumbar cerebrospinal fluid contained protein 70 mg/ 100 ml. Glucose and pyruvate tolerance tests, serum W.R., serum B12, and the serum creatine phosphokinase (32 i.u./l.) were all normal. The right sural nerve and peroneus brevis muscle were biopsied. PROGRESS He was considered to have polyneuritis and was treated with prednisone 20 mg daily for four weeks.
By the end of the course of steroid the paraesthesiae and numbness in the fingers had disappeared, but the patient thought that his hands were weaker than before. When last seen in August 1967 his condition was unchanged.
HISTOLOGICAL FINDINGS (a) Sural nerve biopsy The lesions observed were very similar to those seen in Case 1, with severe loss of nerve fibres, marked endoneurial fibrosis and the presence in the nerve of occasional ovoids of myelin-like material. Isolated, teased fibres had a bizarre 'beaded' appearance due to the presence on them of osmiophilic globules (Fig. 9) . There was extensive segmental de-and remyelination, and osmiophilic globules of various sizes were present along the internodes. FIG. 9. Case 3. Consecutive lengths ofa singlefibre from the sural nerve. There is veryextensive demyelination, sometimes extending over several segments, and densely-stained globules are also present. (Osmic-acid, x 100.)
There was no inflammatory infiltration in the nerve and its blood vessels appeared normal.
The relationship between fibre diameter and internodal length was measured, and the results, plotted according to the convention of Fullerton et al. (1965) , are shown in Figure 10 . Large numbers of fibres bore inappropriately short segments which are typical of regeneration after axonal degeneration, and the wide scatter of intemodal lengths confirms the many observations of demyelinated and healing segments.
Electron microscopy There was severe endoneurial fibrosis and many nerve fibres were represented by thick bundles of collagen fibres with a central core of an abnormal nerve fibre. No true coils or whorls of Schwann cells were found (Fig. 11) .
The majority of axis cylinders appeared normal but a few showed focal collections of mitochondria and small vesicles. Some large axons had very thin myelin sheaths and were probably undergoing remyelination. As in Case 1, Schwann cells appeared normal apart from their enveloped multi-layered globular inclusions, apparently derived from nearby degenerating myelin. The globules appeared to lie outside the main bulk of the Schwann cell cytoplasm, but were almost certainly connected to it by continuity of plasma membrane until degeneration was well established. This was shown in a few instances by finding globules which were enclosed by a few of the outer turns of the myelin sheath. Many Schwann cells, whether bearing normal or abnormally thin myelin sheaths, contained large cytoplasmic multilaminated osmiophilic ovoids typical of 'myelin figures'.
(b) Peroneus brevis muscle biposy There was marked neurogenic atrophy of the muscle. No intra-muscular nerves were found.
Members of three generations of family A and one member of the unrelated family B have suffered from a peripheral sensori-motor neuropathy. In ave not examined personally, also has a internodes of normal length and the short segments of Although the main clinical signs were healed demyelination implying that Schwann cell ,tor system, there were also sensory damage may occur independently of lesions to the s, and pathological lesions were demon-axis cylinders which they envelop. both motor and sensory nerves in the The multi-lamellated, myelin-like structure of the nerve biopsies.
globules suggests that they consist of complex ological position of this disorder is not phospholipids and this is supported by their staining we suggest it be given the description of reactions. The electron microscope evidence, which uropathy' until its relationship with other showed apparent continuity of globules and normal s has been clarified. Clinically it appears myelin sheath, suggests two possible ways at least y to resemble the variety of peroneal in which they could arise. Firstly, as the globules trophy with sensory loss as described, appear to be breakdown products of myelin there , by England and Denny-Brown (1952) c. Globule lying within myelin sheath (x 7,500).
Insert shows myelin-like lamination ofglobule at higher magnification (x 50,800).
sheaths by the chronic degeneration of nerve fibres. If this hypothesis is applicable to GN, the metabolic defect in this disease, either sporadic or inherited in its expression, has at least two effects on nerve fibres because it appears to have caused both destruction of axis cylinders and the defective removal of myelin debris which has resulted in the formation of 'globules'. The three patients described seem to be examples of a disease of the peripheral nervous system in which both axons and their Schwann cell-myelin sheaths are damaged. Such effects of disease are perhaps more commonly recognized in the central nervous system where they sometimes appear to be due to a single genetic metabolic defect. It will be of great theoretical and practical interest ifa comparable enzymatic failure can be found also in globular neuropathy.
Members of three generations of one family and one member of another suffered from a progressive peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy.
Study of sural nerve biopsies from two cases showed axonal degeneration, segmental de-and remyelination and incorporation of bizarre globules of complex phospholipids into the myelin sheaths.
It is suggested tentatively that the families have a metabolic disorder, possibly inherited, which has produced chronic axonal degeneration and damage to myelin sheaths. There also appears to be either defective degradation of myelin by the Schwann cells of demyelinating segments or an abnormal myelin formed initially may resist breakdown along the usual paths.
A variety of DNA base modifications are generated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and most of these lesions are excised by DNA glycosylases in living cells (1) . Escherichia coli, the best characterized organism for the repair of oxidized DNA, uses different DNA glycosylases for purine and pyrimidine base lesions (2) . A wide variety of oxidized pyrimidines are excised by E.coli endonuclease III. The general importance of this DNA glycosylase for life is suggested by the fact that many organisms whose complete genome sequences have been analyzed possess E.coli nth-like gene(s) and putative homologs are found in the database of various eukaryotic sequences from yeast to man (3) .
A gene product of the human homolog, termed hNTH1, was characterized as possessing a substrate specificity similar to that of E.coli endonuclease III (3, 4) . MutM/Fpg, another E.coli DNA glycosylase, acts on oxidized purines representing 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) and 2,6-diamino-4-hydroxy-5-N-methylformamidopyrimidine (Fapy). The biological significance of the 8-oxoG is widely recognized because of its strong mutagenic potential and abundant production by ROS in cells. To counteract the 8-oxoG-induced mutations, E.coli provides two additional enzymes, namely, MutY that excises mispaired adenine opposite 8-oxoG, and MutT that acts as 8-oxo-dGTPase to sanitize the nucleotide pool. Human homologs of mutY and mutT have been cloned as hMYH (5) and hMTH1 (6) , suggesting that the repair of 8-oxoG is also crucial for human. Although a homolog of the mutM gene has not been identified in human, a gene encoding for a DNA glycosylase functionally similar to MutM, termed OGG1, was cloned initially from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (7, 8) and recently from human as hMMH/hOGG1/hOGH1 (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) . It is, therefore, reasonable to suppose that hOGG1, hMYH and hMTH1 cooperatively protect against the 8-oxoG-induced mutagenesis in human, as MutM, MutY and MutT in E.coli (15) .
The apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) site in DNA is generated by spontaneous base loss or by the action of DNA glycosylase. The AP site is toxic because it blocks DNA replication and is mutagenic when translesional DNA synthesis takes place (1) . A major AP endonuclease, APE (APEX/HAP1/Ref-1), initiates the repair by nicking 5′-adjacent to the AP site. The incision leaves a 5′-terminal deoxyribose 5-phosphate (dRP) which disturbs the following repair synthesis. Experiments of in vitro reconstitution have shown that dRPase activity associated by DNA polymerase β (polβ) or nuclease activity of FEN-1 is required for the removal of the 5′-lesion and the subsequent repair synthesis (16, 17) . This base excision repair (BER) model appears to be limited to the APE-initiated repair and to the event in the nucleus. On the other hand, hNTH1 and hOGG1 are able to incise DNA strand at the glycosylitically produced AP site without APE due to the associated AP lyase activity. Thus, the process of repair initiated by the action of the DNA glycosylase/AP lyase remains to be established.
Mitochondrial oxidative energy metabolism is the major intracellular source of ROS. Mitochondrial biomolecules including mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are constantly exposed to a high *To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +81 22 717 8465; Fax: +81 22 717 8470; Email: ayasui@idac.tohoku.ac.jp extent of ROS. The accumulation of oxidative DNA lesions or the resulting mtDNA alteration has been implicated in the cause of aging and several human diseases such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease (reviewed in [18] [19] [20] . While the mitochondrial antioxidants such as superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione are well known to defend against ROS, the DNA repair mechanism and responsible enzymes in mitochondria are poorly understood. Nonetheless, observations that MutM-and endonuclease IIIsensitive DNA lesions are efficiently removed from mtDNA (21, 22) , suggests the presence of DNA repair enzymes in this organella. Biochemical studies have shown that mitochondria contain endonuclease III-like AP nicking activity (23) and OGG1/MutM-like DNA glycosylase/AP lyase activity (24) . Additionally, mitochondrial localization of hMTH1 has been documented, suggesting the existence of a repair and protection system against 8-oxoG-induced mutations (25) . These studies prompted us to examine localization of products of DNA glycosylase genes recently isolated from human.
Among eukaryotic DNA glycosylases whose genes have been cloned so far, uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG) is the only protein for which mitochondrial localization has been demonstrated (26, 27) . It was revealed that two alternative forms are transcribed from the UNG gene, which have distinct N-terminal sequences: one containing a nuclear localization signal (NLS), and the other containing a mitochondrial targeting signal (MTS) (27) . While single coding sequences for hMYH, hNTH1 and hAPE have been reported, we have previously identified four distinct hOGG1 transcripts generated by alternative splicing. All the isoforms (types 1a, 1b, 1c and 2) are equally able to reduce the mutation frequency of E.coli (mutM mutY) host cells (9) . Here, we present the subcellular localization of the recombinant proteins of four hOGG1 isoforms, hMYH, hNTH1 and APE to assess the possibility that these gene products may be involved in the presumed mitochondrial base excision repair for oxidative damage.

Four hOGG1 cDNAs were cloned previously (9) . The other cDNA encoding for hMYH, hNTH1 or hAPE was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from human testis or brain cDNA library (Gibco-BRL) based on the database sequences (MYH, U63329; APE, D90373; NTH1, U81285). In order to tag the C-terminus of the protein, PCR was performed using a C-terminal primer containing a FLAG sequence and stop codon (GAC TAC AAG GAC GAC GAT GAC AAG TGA). The 5′-sequence was modified by introducing a translation signal (CCACC) in front of the initiation codon. The FLAG-tagged cDNA was cloned behind the CMV promoter of the expression vector, pTargeT (Promega). A fusion construct with green fluorescent protein (GFP) was obtained by subcloning a PCR product having appropriate restriction sites on the ends into pEGFP-C1 (Clontech). observed under a microscope. Transfectants with FLAG-tagged constructs were subsequently washed once, treated with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 2 min, washed twice, and incubated with a blocking reagent (NEN) in TN buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl, 0.15 M NaCl, pH 7.5). The cells were then incubated with anti-FLAG M2 antibody (Kodak) at 40 µg/ml in TNT buffer (TN buffer containing 0.05% Tween 20) at room temperature for 1 h or at 4_C overnight. Indirect immunofluorescence was performed with a combination of a biotin-labeled second antibody (Zymed), a tyramide signal amplification system (TSA-Indirect, NEN) and a fluorescent conjugate (Streptavidin-Fluorescein, NEN) according to the manufacturer's instructions. For detection of mitochondria, MitoTracker Red CMXros (Molecular Probes) was added to the culture medium of the transfected cells 20 min before the fixation. The transfectants were visualized with a fluorescence microscope (Leica model DM LB) equipped with photographic system (MPS60). Filter L4 or TX (Leica) was used for the fluorescein and GFP or CMXros, respectively.

A putative NLS has been suggested for hOGG1 (9) (10) (11) (12) 14) , for hNTH1 (4) and for hAPE (29) . We re-evaluated possible targeting signals for nucleus and mitochondria by using the PSORT program (30; Fig. 1 ). Four isoforms of hOGG1 (types 1a, 1b, 1c and 2) with a variable C-terminus of 8-108 residues are generated by alternative splicing (9) . The putative NLS is exclusively found in the C-terminal segment of type 1a sequence. Human MYH, NTH1 and APE are homologs of E.coli mutY, nth and xth, respectively. Their deduced sequences have 'extended' segments which are not included in the E.coli counterparts. The predicted NLSs reside mostly in the extended segments. For mitochondrial targeting, it is known that regular MTS is located at the N-terminal end composed of typically 20-60 residues with abundant positive charges, very little if any negative charges, and frequent hydroxylated residues which can form an amphipathic α-helix (31). Mitochondrial targeting is predicted for hOGG1, hMYH and hNTH1.
To access the actual localization of the hOGG1 isoforms in vivo, we transiently expressed a construct in COS-7 cells, in which a FLAG epitope was added at the C-terminus of the respective cDNA. The protein expression and its subcellular localization was detected by immunofluorescence staining using anti-FLAG M2 antibody. Cells were also treated with CMXros prior to fixation in order to visualize mitochondria.
As expected, the tagged type 1a protein was mainly detected in the nucleus. We observed, in addition to the nucleus, cytosolic fluorescence forming dots or lines characteristic of mitochondria ( Fig. 2A) . In sharp contrast to the nuclear translocation of the type 1a protein, the other three proteins were detected not in nuclei at all but in mitochondria (Fig. 2B-D) . Therefore, the sequence PAKRRK at 333 in the C-terminal segment of type 1a is actually utilized for nuclear targeting and the common N-terminal domain contains a MTS. Similar localization for the each isoform was obtained in HeLa transfectants (not shown).
To confirm whether the common N-terminal region of hOGG1 protein possesses a regular MTS, a truncated protein with a deletion of N-terminal 31 amino acids, which retains the core domain homologous to S.cerevisiae OGG1, was expressed in COS-7 cells. The epitope-tagged ∆N31-type 1a protein was targeted to the nucleus without mitochondrial localization (Fig. 2E) . The same N-terminal deletion from the type 2 protein (∆N31-type 2) resulted in no mitochondrial localization, weak fluorescence from the nucleus and several bright granular dots in the cytosol (Fig. 2F) , probably suggesting rapid transport and degradation in lysosome.
In the bacterial repair and protection system against 8-oxoGinduced mutations, MutY and MutT also play substantial roles. However, in a mutT -background E.coli (mutY + ) is more mutagenic than E.coli (mutY -) because MutY excises adenine opposite 8-oxoG that has been misincorporated by DNA 
polymerase (32) . In human cells, hMTH1 has been found in the mitochondrial matrix as well as in cytosol (25) . This situation could allow hMYH protein to work in the mitochondria for cooperative DNA repair with hOGG1. Figure 4 shows the immunofluorescence staining of transiently expressed hMYH-FLAG protein. The protein was clearly co-localized with mitochondria in COS-7 cells (Fig. 3A) . Unexpectedly, hMYH-FLAG protein was hardly detected in nucleus, although some transfectants which appeared to strongly express the recombinant protein showed both mitochondrial and nuclear localization of the protein (not shown). We further examined the localization of the hMYH-FLAG protein in different cell lines, HeLa cells (Fig. 3B ) and CHO-9 cells (Fig. 3C) . The results indicated mitochondrial localization of the protein and very little if any nuclear immunofluorescence in either type of cells.
According to the alignment (5), the human sequence, relative to E.coli MutY, has extended segments composed of 63 residues toward the N-terminus and ∼50 residues toward the C-terminus. One NLS-like sequence (PWRRR at 98) is found in the core domain, but this is in the conserved block. A more likely NLS (RKKPR at 505) is located in the extended C-terminal segment (Fig. 1) . To determine whether the latter C-terminal NLS is active or not, we expressed a GFP protein fused at its C-terminus with the C-terminal extended segment (55 residues) of the hMYH sequence (GFP-C55). The COS-7 transfectants showed nuclear localization of the protein (Fig. 3E) . Furthermore, a construct in which the extended N-terminal segment (64 residues) was deleted from the hMYH-FLAG resulted in the nuclear localization of the ∆N64 protein (Fig. 3D) . These results indicate that the C-terminal segment has a potential NLS. 
We studied subcellular localization for another DNA glycosylase, hNTH1, to link the gene product to the observed mitochondrial repair activity for oxidative pyrimidines (21, 22) . The hNTH1 sequence has an extended N-terminal segment composed of ∼95 residues (3, 4) . N-terminal MTS and three putative NLSs appear within or near this segment (PLRRR at 30, PVKRPRK at 46, PKVRR at 117; Fig. 1 ). The expression of hNTH1-FLAG protein in COS-7 cells (Fig. 4A ) and HeLa cells (Fig. 4B ) resulted in the protein being transported into both the nucleus and mitochondria. Therefore, the hNTH1 protein has dual transport signals to repair nuclear and mitochondrial DNA lesions.
In contrast to the above DNA glycosylases, N-terminal MTS is not predicted in the hAPE sequence while the NLS of hAPE is located near the end of the N-terminus (PKRGKK at 2). The extended N-terminal segment of mammalian APE is a domain, apart from the AP endonuclease activity, for the redox function to facilitate DNA binding of several transcription factors such as AP-1 (31). Although activity of hAPE protein is found mostly in nuclear extracts, immunohistochemical studies have shown differential nuclear and cytosolic localization of the protein depending on the tissues and cell types (34) and colorectal adenomas and carcinomas (35) . We examined subcellular localization of hAPE-FLAG protein in COS-7 cells. As shown in Figure 5 , the recombinant protein was predominantly localized in the nucleus. Mitochondrial and other cytosolic hAPE-FLAG protein was below the detection limit in the transfectants.
We used an epitope-tagging strategy to demonstrate the subcellular localization of hOGG1, hMYH, hNTH1 and hAPE proteins. Results of the nuclear localizations of hOGG1 type 1a and hNTH1, together with recent evidence that the nucleotide excision repair (NER) removes thymine glycol and 8-oxoG in vitro (36) , indicate that the nucleus has two distinct pathways for repair of the same lesions. More importantly, the mitochondrial localizations of four hOGG1 isoforms and hNTH1 imply that these DNA glycosylases are the requisite enzymes for the repair of mtDNA. Although the specific contribution of hOGG1 and hNTH1 to the repair is uncertain, the substrates characterized to date for hOGG1 9, (11) (12) (13) (14) , and hNTH1 (thymine glycol and urea; 3,4) are the most abundant DNA lesions generated by ROS and are included in the MutM-and endonuclease III-sensitive lesions, efficient removal of which from mtDNA has been observed previously (21, 22, 37) . Since mitochondria do not appear to possess NER for the removal of these lesions, our results underscore the importance of mitochondrial BER for these oxidative lesions initiated by hOGG1 and hNTH1 DNA glycosylases. In addition, we showed that hMYH is also targeted to mitochondria. Together with the previously demonstrated mitochondrial localization of hMTH1 (25) , hOGG1, hMYH and hMTH1 can constitute mitochondrial repair and protection system against the 8-oxoG-induced mutagenesis.
The molecular weight of the hOGG1 isoform varies with the length of the each C-terminal segment. Type 1a (39 kDa) and type 1b (36 kDa) are small, consisting of a core domain conserved between yeast and human, while type 1c (46 kDa) and type 2 (47 kDa) have a relatively long C-terminal segment with sequences unrelated to each other (Fig. 1 ). An 8-oxoG DNA glycosylase/AP lyase purified from rat liver mitochondria has a molecular mass of 25-30 kDa as estimated by gel-filtration (38) . When considering that a presequence (usually 20-60 residues) is processed in the mitochondrial matrix, the purified protein could be a mitochondrial form of a rat OGG1 protein, presumably corresponding to the small human isoform (type 1a and/or type 1b).
hOGG1 splicing variants were obtained from human colon cDNA (9) . These transcripts seem to be ubiquitously expressed when analyzed by RT-PCR and at least type 1a and type 1b are expressed at similar level by RNase protection assay (9; H.Aburatani and Y.Hippo, unpublished). Also, partial sequences for all the isoforms from various sources have been entered in the EST database. It is an interesting question why human cells express four isoforms all directed to mitochondria. Recently, a limited substrate specificity of S.cerevisiae OGG1 (a counterpart of human type 1a) has been reported, where the enzyme does not excise several purine lesions including adenine lesions 8-hydroxyadenine and 4,6-diamino-5-formamidopyrimidine (39) . The variable C-terminal domain in type 1c and type 2 might provide different or additional substrate specificity in order to manage the repair for such minor purine lesions in mitochondria in the absence of NER.
The hMYH gene encoding for a 59 kDa protein with a 41% amino acid sequence similarity to E.coli MutY was cloned from a database search with the bacterial sequence (5) . While the activity of the gene product has not been published, a 65 kDa protein with the adenine DNA glycosylase activity and the cross-reactivity to anti-MutY antibodies has been purified from calf thymus and HeLa cells, which is also termed MYH (40) . We presumed that the hMYH gene encodes for the latter purified protein and used the nucleotide sequence of the gene to amplify the cDNA. We thus initially expected nuclear localization of the recombinant protein because the protein had been obtained from the nuclear extracts (40) . However, translocation of the fulllength hMYH-FLAG protein into nuclei was relatively weak in COS-7 cells and almost undetectable in HeLa and CHO-9 cells. The results of the GFP-fusion and the N-terminal truncated protein indicate that the C-terminal sequence of hMYH contains a potential NLS. Therefore, we conclude that the NLS of hMYH protein is less effective than the N-terminal MTS as a protein transport signal. However, a discrepancy remains between calf thymus nuclear extracts containing MYH protein activity and the apparent absence of the recombinant hMYH protein in HeLa/ CHO-9 transfectants (Fig. 3B and C) . It is possible to consider the existence of a second, yet similar, hMYH protein in the nucleus. With regard to this, the exclusive localization of UNG protein has been found to be originated by alternative splicing (28) . The second hMYH, if present, might be an isoform derived from an alternative splicing of the hMYH gene where the N-terminal MTS is deleted or replaced. Further work is needed to identify the gene providing the nuclear MYH activity.
A BER repair model for AP sites has been proposed, which includes APE incision and polβ-or PCNA-dependent processing (16, 17) . Although the model is not fully applicable to mitochondrial BER, incision at AP sites is expected to initiate the repair. Recently, a class II mitochondrial AP endonuclease of Xenopus laevis has been revealed to initiate the AP-DNA repair in vitro (41) . Our result showing apparent nuclear localization of hAPE suggests that the mitochondrial AP endonuclease might be an alternative form of Xenopus APE or encoded by a distinct gene. On the other hand, an early study showed other AP nicking activities in mouse plasmacytoma mitochondria (23) . The enzymes are EDTA resistant and incise UV-irradiated DNA in addition to AP-DNA. These properties and the mitochondrial localization of hNTH1 shown here suggest that at least one of the mitochondrial AP nicking activities is an AP lyase function of NTH1 protein. The contribution of the mitochondrial AP lyase to the AP-DNA repair and the processing of 3′-unsaturated sugarphosphate generated by it remain to be established.
MtDNA alterations including deletion, rearrangement, point mutation and fragmentation are age-associated events (18) (19) (20) . Oxidative damage is thought to be a primary cause of these mutations which lead to mitochondrial dysfunction and then increased ROS production (20) . Normal mitochondrial function seems to be required for maintenance of the mitochondrial DNA repair capacity because oxidative lesions in mtDNA are accumulated in aged cells, and are unrepaired in cells under strong oxidative stress which does not affect the nuclear DNA repair capacity (42) . Elucidation and characterization of the mitochondrial DNA repair enzymes involved in BER and also mismatch repair is an important step toward understanding the molecular basis of age-associated mitochondrial genome instability.
Activated macrophages produce various cytokines, chemokines, and enzymes (Chan et al., 2011) , and exhibit diverse and opposing functions, including pro-and anti-inflammatory responses, tissue repair and destruction, and tumoricidal, proangiogenesis and pro-tumoral functions (Labonte et al., 2014; Villalta et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2014) . The paradoxical plasticity of macrophage function is closely related to the polarized activation state.
Heterogenic macrophages are divided into two subpopulations: classically activated macrophages (M1) and alternatively activated macrophages (M2). LPS and IFN gamma activate classical or M1 macrophages, which exhibit the following characteristics: high endocytic and phagocytic capacities; high production of interleukin-12 (IL-12), interleukin-23 (IL-23) and toxic intermediates (e.g., nitric oxide and reactive oxygen intermediates); great antigen presentation abilities; and high antimicrobial and anti-proliferative activities (Sica and Mantovani, 2012) . Therefore, M1 macrophages are generally considered potent effector cells that exhibit anti-microbial and tumoricidal abilities and secrete large amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines (Sica et al., 2014) . In contrast, interleukin-4 (IL-4), interleukin-13 (IL-13), glucocorticoids, interleukin-10 (IL-10) or immunoglobulin complexes activate alternatively activated or M2 macrophages. M2 cells produce small amounts of inflammatory cytokines (e.g., , promote tissue remodeling and repair, contribute to angiogenesis and tumor progression, and exhibit low antigen presentation capacity (Gordon et al., 2010) . These seemingly opposing effects may be explained by the existence of phenotypically and functionally heterogeneous macrophages. Several molecules, including miR223, suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3), Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors γ (PPARγ), and cells, such as Th1, Th2, Tregs and B cells, regulate macrophage polarization and contribute to different macrophage functions (Wang et al., 2014; Wong et al., 2010) .
Macrophages obtain surprisingly high tumoricidal activities after activation by select stimuli. Bacilli Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is a strong stimulus that is used for the treatment of superficial bladder cancer (Huang et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2014) . However, the mechanism of action of BCG is not clear. Several studies suggest that the tumoricidal effect is related to the ability of BCG to activate macrophages (Lodillinsky et al., 2010; Luo et al., 2006; Svatek et al., 2015; Thompson et al., 2015) . Stimulation of macrophages with BCG in vitro induces cytotoxicity against bladder cancer cells via interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-12 (IL-12), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) secretion, and this activation process is inhibited by IL-10 and direct contact with cancer cells (Benoit et al., 2008; Svatek et al., 2015) . The cytotoxicity of BCG-activated macrophages requires direct cell-to-cell contact and soluble factors, such as IL-6, Interferon gamma (FN-γ) and TNF-α. Neutralizing endogenous cytokines, including IL-12, IL-18, IFN-γ and TNF-α, reduce the cytotoxicity of BCG-activated macrophage by 38%, 22%, 15% and 94%, respectively (Luo et al., 2006) .
Novel macrophage activated-associated protein 1 (NMAAP1, accession number: NP 001001738) was identified using capillary liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in BCG-activated macrophage (Zhang et al., 2007) . NMAAP1 is a novel membrane-associated protein in BCGactivated macrophages that contains a partial male abnormal 21 (MAB-21) domain, and it is expressed in a wide range of tissues (Kang et al., 2010) . MAB-21 is a conserved sequence that acts as part of the mechanism required for correct cell fate choice, and the MAB-21 gene in vertebrates exhibits an amino acid homology up to 90% (Baldessari et al., 2004; Yamada et al., 2004; Zhao et al., 2011) . DANGER1A has an MAB-21 domain that binds the inositol trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) to promote the differentiation and outgrowth of neuronal processes (Ho et al., 2001) . Whether NMAAP1 has the same effect as DANGER1A is not known.
This study investigated the relationship between macrophage polarization state and NMAAP1 expression after BCG treatment in a mouse model to clarify the physiological function of NMAAP1 in BCG-activated macrophage polarization. NMAAP1 overexpression in RAW264.7 cells was established to investigate the effect of NMAAP1 on macrophage phenotype, phagocytic ability and tumoricidal activities. Our results demonstrate that NMAAP1 is a modulatory protein in macrophage polarization and cytotoxicity.
Cells and animals RAW264.7 cells (murine macrophage cell line ATCC TIB-71) and transfected RAW264.7 cells were cultured in Dulbecco′s Modified Eagle′s Medium (DMEM) with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Sigma, USA), 100 μg/ml streptomycin and 100 IU/ml penicillin (Invitrogen). Cells were maintained at 37°C in a 5% CO 2 incubator. The MCA207 cell line was kindly provided by Prof. Kangla Tsung (Stanford University, USA). This cell line is a methylcholan-threne-induced transplantable tumor in C57BL/6 mice, and these cells were maintained in the same conditions. ICR mice were purchased from the Experimental Animal Center of Jilin University. All mice were housed under specific pathogen-free conditions in the animal facilities of Jilin University. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Jilin University approved the experimental procedures. Transfection RAW264.7 cells were seeded at 2 x 10 5 per well in a 24-well plate and grown until 70-80% confluency before transfection. pIRES2-EGFP/NMAAP1 or pIRES2-EGFP/CONTROL plasmids were directly transfected into the cells using Lipofectamine™ 2000 Transfection Reagent (Invitrogen, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Fluorescein-labeled pIRES2-EGFP/NMAAP1 or pIRES2-EGFP/CONTROL transfected cells were examined under fluorescence optics to determine transfection efficiency after 24 and 48 h. 3-5% and 7-8% initial transfection efficiency was observed in RAW264.7 cells 24 and 48 h post-transfection, respectively. Selection was performed 72 h later using media that contained G418 (400 μg/ml). Culture continued for 14 days to generate stable transfectants, and G418-resistant clones were isolated. GFP signals from transfected RAW264.7 cells were assessed using fluorescence microscopy. Clones were further expanded and analyzed usingby regular PCR and Western blotting. Transfected cells were used for subsequent experiments.
BCG treatment and peritoneal macrophage preparation ICR mice (n = 6/group/treatment/experiment) were injected intraperitoneally with 2 mg BCG (Shanghai Institute of Biological Products) or PBS on day 2 and day 10. Peritoneal exudate cells were harvested from these mice, and peritoneal macrophages were purified on days 4, 8, and 12 by washing cells from peritoneal cavity lavage with 5 ml of ice-cold, sterile PBS, according to a previously described protocol (Park et al., 2014) . The cells were distributed in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS in six-well tissue culture plates (5 x 10 6 cells/ml) and incubated for 4 h. Non-adherent cells were removed by washing twice with Opti-MEM at 37°C in a 5% CO 2 incubator.
Total RNA was directly isolated from adherent macrophages using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, USA), according to the manufacturer′s protocol. RNA quantity and quality were determined using an absorbance microplate reader TQuant (BioTEK, USA). cDNA for reverse transcription was prepared from 2 μg of total RNA using oligo(dT) primers and reverse transcriptase M-MLV in a total volume of 20 μl, according to the manufacturer′s instructions (Takara, Japan). The resulting cDNA was used for real-time PCR for NMAAP1, iNOSII and cytokines (ARG-1, TNF-α, IL-10, and TGF-β) using an ABI PRISM 7300 sequence detection system (Applied Biosystems, USA). Quantitative PCR was performed using SYBR green PCR master mix (Applied Biosystem, USA). Expression of each gene was normalized to the expression of the housekeeping gene, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). The following forward and reverse specific primer sequences were used:
Reverse 5′-CGTCCGGAGTAATTTGGTGC-3′ IL-6: Forward 5′-TAGTCCTTCCTACCCCAATTT-3′
Reverse 5′-TTGGTCCTTAGCCACTCCTTC-3′ KLF4: Forward 5′-TATACATTCCGCCACAGCAG-3′
Reverse 5′-CGCCTCTTGCTTAATCTTGG-3′ MCP-1: Forward 5′-TTAAAAACCTGGATCGGAACC-3′
Reverse 5′-GCATTAGCTTCAGATTTACGG-3′ Fizz1: Forward 5′-CCCTTCTCATCTGCATCT-3′
Reverse 5′-CTGGATTGGCAAGAAGTTCC-3′ SOCS1: Forward 5′-CTGCGGCTTCTATTGGGGAC-3′
Reverse 5′-AAAAGGCAGTCGAAGTCTCG-3′ SOCS3: Forward 5′-CCCTTGCAGTTCTAAGTTCAA-3′
Reverse 5′-ACCTTTGACAAGCGGACTCTC-3′ ARG-1: Forward 5′-CAGTCTGGCAGTTGGAAGC-3′
Reverse 5′-GGTTGTCAGGGGAGTGTTG-3′ TNF-α: Forward 5′-ACTGAACTTCGGGGTGATCG-3′
Reverse 5′-CCACTTGGTGGTTTGCTACG-3′ IL-10: Forward 5′-GTTGCCAAGCCTTATCGG-3′ Reverse 5′-GCTCTTATTTTCACAGGGGAG-3′ TGF-β: Forward 5′-GAGGCGGTGCTCGCTTTGTA-3′
Reverse 5′-CGTTGTTGCGGTCCACCATTA-3′ GAPDH: Forward 5′-GACTTCAACAGCAACTCCCACTC-3′
Reverse 5′-TAGCCGTATTCATTGTCATACCAG-3′
Each reaction for real-time quantitative PCR contained 1x SYBR Green PCR master mixture (Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix; Applied Biosystems, UK), 10 pmol of each primer, and 1 μl of cDNA in a final volume of 20 μl. The following reaction conditions were used: initial activation step (5 min at 95°C) and cycling step (denaturation for 30 s at 94°C, annealing for 30 s at 60°C and extension for 1 min at 72°C × 40 cycles) followed by melt curve analysis. Detection of the dequenched probe, calculation of threshold cycles (Ct values), and further data analyses were performed using the Sequence Detector software. Relative changes in NMAAP1, iNOSII and cytokines (ARG-1, TNF-α, IL-10, and TGF-β) mRNA expression were compared with control, normalized to GAPDH, and were quantified using the 2-(△△Ct) method. Therefore, all values for experimental samples are expressed as fold differences between the sample mRNA and the calibrator (GAPDH) mRNA.
Cells were washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline, counted, and re-suspended in FACS buffer (3% FBS in PBS containing 0.01% NaN 3 ). Cells (1 x 10 6 cells/samples) for phenotypic analyses were stained using the indicated fluorochromeconjugated antibody for 30 min on ice. Cells were washed with FACS buffer, and appropriate isotype controls were used in all cases. Typical forward-and side-scatter gates for flow cytometric analyses were set to exclude dead and aggregated cells. A total of 10 4 events in the gate were collected and analyzed using Accuri C6 and software (BD Biosciences, USA). The anti-CD23, anti-CD16/32 and anti-F4/80 antibodies (Abs) used in flow cytometric analyses were obtained from eBioscience (USA).
Cytokines measurement using ELISA Blood was extracted from mouse eye sockets. Serum was prepared using routine methods and stored in a -80°C refrigerator for subsequent tests. Serum and supernatant cytokine levels of were measured using an enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) kit according to the manufacturer′s instructions (eBioscience, USA). Briefly, 100 μl of sera were added to each well of a 96-well plate precoated with 100 μl/well capture antibody and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. The wells were washed and a detection antibody (biotin-conjugated antibody) was added for 1 h at 37°C. Wells were washed, and an avidin-horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled Ab was added for 30 min at 37°C. A final wash was performed, and the presence of HRP-labeled Abs was revealed by the addition of tetramethylbenidine (TMB). The reaction was stopped with sulfuric acid (2 N). Coloration was evaluated using an optical density at 450-570 nm.
Microsphere pellets were resuspended in 3% (w/v) BSA and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Microspheres were sonicated in a bath sonicator at 80 W for 5 min. The coating of microspheres in BSA ensures that beads remain in a monodispersed state and do not aggregate. OV/RAW264.7 and ON/RAW264.7 cells were plated at 5 × 10 5 cells/well in 6-well culture plates (USA) for 24 h (37°C, 5% CO 2 , humidified), and microspheres were added to each well at a final cell to particle ratio of 1:15 (1 μm) for approximately 90 min at 37°C. The culture media were aspirated, and cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS to remove excess beads. Cells were observed under fluorescence microscopy to analyze the phagocytosis rate and phagocytosis index or lifted from culture plates by gentle scraping for flow cytometry analyses. Mean fluorescence represents the average fluorescent intensity of all intact cells counted per experiment. 
Various cells were harvested and lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM PMSF) for 30 min at 4°C. Total cell extracts were separated using 12% SDS/PAGE gels and transferred to PVDF membranes. Membranes were blocked with 3% BSA and incubated with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution. The signals were visualized using the chemiluminescent substrate method and the SuperSignal West Pico Kit (Pierce). The β-actin was used as an internal control to normalize the loading materials.

We examined the phenotype of BCG-activated macrophages to delineate the effect of BCG on macrophage biological functions. We detected the expression of M1 and M2 cell markers and NMAAP1 levels. CD16/32 (M1) and CD23 (M2) were used to detect the phenotypes of BCG-activated macrophages. The percentage of BCG-activated macrophages that expressed M1 markers increased on day 4 and decreased on day 8. Mice were challenged with i.p. BCG on day 10. Therefore, there was an increase in these markers on day 12 (Figs. 1A and 1B) . We next examined whether NMAAP1 was critical in macrophage polarization. We performed quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR) analysis of BCG-activated macrophages (BAMs). NMAAP1 mRNA increased in BAMs with a peak of a ~70-fold increase on day 4 and decreased in the following 4 days. NMAAP1 mRNA expression increased from day 8 to day 12 and decreased subsequently. NMAAP1 mRNA expression increased slightly on day 12. There was a similar pattern of changes in the percentage of M1 BAMs. IL-10 mRNA expression increased slowly from day 4 to day 8 and declined rapidly until day 12. Therefore, the change in IL-10 mRNA expression was opposite to NMAAP1 mRNA expression (Fig. 1C) . We performed ELISAs to measure IL-10 and TNF-α release in BCG-stimulated mice sera on day 4, 8 and 12 (Fig. 1D) . 
Some morphological changes in RAW264.7 were observed after gene transfection. EGFP expression was observed 24 and 48 hours after transfection using fluorescent microscopy, and the transfection efficiency reached peak levels at 72 h. RAW264.7 cells were transfected with pIRES2-EGFP/NMAAP1 or pIRES2-EGFP/CONTROL expression plasmids and selected with G418 as indicated. Stably transfected cells were observed in the same field ( Fig. 2A) . The results of RT-PCR and Western blot analyses verified that RAW264.7 cells transfected with pIRES2-EGFP/NMAAP1 overexpressed NMAAP1 (ON/RAW264.7) compared to cells transfected with empty pIRES2-EGFP/CONTROL (OV/RAW264.7) (Figs. 2B-2E ). The molecular weight of the expressed full-length NMAAP1 was approximately 63 kDa, which is consistent with the previously reported molecular weight of NMAAP1 (Zhao et al., 2011) .
Classically activated macrophages exhibit a TNF-α high iN-OS-II high cytokine profile and exhibit an increased expression of CD16/32 (Herder et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2013) . Therefore, we evaluated whether NMAAP1 played a regulatory role in macrophage polarization. We characterized ON/RAW264.7 cells along an M1/M2 spectrum using functional and phenotypic readouts. Cells were stained and analyzed using flow cytometry of CD16/32 and CD23 expression (Fig. 3A) . A significantly higher percentage of ON/RAW264.7 cells expressed CD16/32 compared to control cells, but lower CD23 expression was observed (30.17% vs. 5.4%, respectively; p < 0.01) (Fig. 3B) . We quantified the expression of phenotypespecific markers of OV/RAW264.7 and ON/RAW264.7 cells using quantitative real-time RT-PCR analyses to determine the influence of NMAAP1 on M1 and M2 gene transcription (Fig. 3C) . The M1 markers iNOS, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-12 and MCP-1 were expressed at higher levels in ON/RAW264.7 cells than OV/RAW264.7 cells, which is consistent with the peritoneal macrophage results. The M2 markers TGF-β, Arg-1, Fizz1 and SOCS3 and the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 were not significantly altered. The expression levels of KLF4 and SOCS1 were markedly lower in ON/RAW264.7 cells than OV/RAW264.7 cells.
TNF-α concentrations in the supernatant of ON/RAW264.7 cells was higher than OV/RAW264.7 cells at 6 h, 12 h and 24 h. ON/RAW264.7 cells produced more IL-1β than OV/RARW 264.7 cells at 24 h and 48 h. ON/RAW264.7 cells produced slightly higher IL-12 than OV/RARW264.7 cells (Fig. 3D ). There were no differences in the levels of the antiinflammatory molecular markers Arg-1 and IL-10 in the supernatants of ON/ RAW264.7 and OV/RAW264.7 cells (Fig.  3E) . These results indicate that NMAAP1 regulates some, but not all, M1 genes.
Phagocytosis is the process by which invading pathogens and dead cells are efficiently removed by phagocytic cells, primarily macrophages. Macrophage phagocytosis plays an important role in host defense (Das et al., 2014) . The phagocytic activities of OV/RAW264.7 and ON/RAW264.7 cells were measured using fluorescent microspheres after co-incubation for 2 h. Phagocytosis rates and phagocytosis index of OV/RAW264.7 and ON/RAW264.7 cells were quantified using fluorescence microscopy (Figs. 4A and 4B) and flow cytometry (Figs. 4C and 4D ). OV/RAW264.7 and ON/RAW264.7 cells efficiently phagocytize fluorescent microspheres. However, ON/RAW264.7 cells exhibited a significantly higher phagocytosis rate and phagocytosis index against xenogeneic target microspheres than OV/RAW264.7 cells.
Cytotoxicity assays were performed via the culture of tumor cells with supernatants collected from OV/RAW264.7 and ON/RAW264.7 cultures to determine the influence of NMAAP1 on the tumoricidal activity of macrophages. ON/RAW264.7 cells presented a more prominent cytotoxicity effect for the inhibition of MCA207 tumor cell viability than OV/RAW264.7 cells (Fig. 5A) .
We measured the contact-dependent tumoricidal function and excluded the possible effect of soluble factors using paraformaldehyde (PFA)-fixed macrophages. PFA-fixed OV/RAW264.7 and ON/RAW264.7 cells did not significantly alter the cytotoxicity of cells co-cultured with MCA207 cells at 24 h, 48 h and 72 h (Fig.  5B ). Tumor cell death was measured using morphological analyses (Hoechst 33342) and flow cytometry to further confirm these results. Figure 5C shows that most cells from the control M. from at least three independent experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001 (unpaired Student t test. compared with the corresponding control values).
h group (MAC207 alone and OV/RAW264.7 + MCA207) contained large and regular nuclei. Clear evidence of chromatin condensation and a clear decrease in cell size was observed in cells cultured for 48 h in the supernatant of ON/RAW264.7 cells cultured for 24 h (white arrow). Cell death was also measured using the fluorescent dye Annexin V-FITC, which binds phosphatidylserine residues that are redistributed from the inner to the outer leaflet of the cell membrane as an early event in apoptosis. After the loss of membrane integrity, 7AAD enters the cell and intercalates into DNA. Figures 5D and 5E show the percentages of Annexin V-stained and 7AAD-stained cells in response to the supernatants of OV/RAW264.7 and ON/RAW264.7 cells (24 h). The supernatant of ON/RAW264.7 cell culture (48 h) on MCA207 culture for 24 h induced a greater population of apoptotic cells than the OV/RAW264.7 group (33.6% vs. 8.1%). These data suggest that NMAAP1 exerts prominent effect on the modulation of macrophage-mediated cytotoxicity, which may occur via NMAAP1 induction of macrophage secretion of more inflammatory cytokines.
Macrophages (Mф) are a heterogeneous cell population that are involved in diverse physiological processes, including antimicrobial defense, wound resolution, inflammation, tissue remodeling and the promotion of tumor growth (Epelman et al., 2014; Wynn et al., 2013) . Macrophages achieve high tumoricidal activity after activation by some stimuli, such as BCG. BCG is the attenuated (virulence-reduced) live bovine tuberculosis bacillus, Mycobacterium bovis, which has lost its virulence in humans. Macrophages recognize BCG through Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) and possibly Tolllike receptor 4 (TLR4) and become activated. Activated macrophages have been used for the treatment of some bladder cancers for more than two decades (Huang et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2014) , and they exhibit antitumor effects via direct cell-tocell contact (Zhang et al., 2007) . Macrophages with strong microbicidal and tumoricidal activities are generally regarded as M1 macrophages, with characteristics of TNF-α, IL-1β, inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS or NOS2), and reactive nitrogen and oxygen intermediates production and promotion of Th1 responses (Biswas et al., 2012; Sica and Mantovani, 2012) . Our results demonstrated that macrophages from BCGinjected mice exhibited an M1 polarized phenotype. However, previous reports demonstrated that some components of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, such as lipoproteins, DnaK and PPE18, interact with TLR2 and activate IL-10 induction in macrophages and polarize macrophages to the M2-like phenotype (Lopes et al., 2014; Nair et al., 2009; Pecora et al., 2006) . One reason for these differences may be that the pathogenic mycobacterium bovis strains differ in their ability to modulate the polarization of macrophages. The B2 and H37Rv strains synergistically induce M1 polarization, and the MP287/03 strain expresses high levels of Arg-1, which lead to lower levels of NO production (Andrade et al., 2012) . Another reason may be that different components of attenuated and viable M. tuberculosis induce the absolute opposite polarization of macrophages. Lipoproteins and the MHC class II inhibition of M. tuberculosis may be destroyed after attenuation, but other components that promote M1 polarization of macrophages remain (Pai et al., 2014) . The components of BCG that promote M1 polarization require more experiments to support these hypotheses. The expression of many proteins was upregulated in BCGactivated macrophages, which would play important roles in the tumoricidal effect or modulatory activities. The novel protein NMAAP1 was specifically expressed on BCG-stimulated macrophages, and it played a crucial role in the regulation of M1 macrophage polarization. BCG-activated macrophages maintained NMAAP1 expression during a state of high activity in M1-polarized cells, which facilitated M1 gene expression. Upregulated NMAAP1 expression in RAW264.7 cells increased the expression of M1 markers (e.g., CD16/32, iNOS, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-12, MCP-1 and IL-1β), and decreased or did not affect M2 markers (e.g., KLF4, SOCS1, IL-10, SOCS3, Fizz1 and Arg-1) (Labonte et al., 2014) .
BCG-activated macrophages kill tumor cells through cell-tocell contact and the secretion of tumoricidal mediators, such as iNOS, TNF-α, INF-γ, IL-2, IL-6 and IL-12, which induce macrophage activation and cytotoxic activity, and IL-10 plays a negative role in BCG-induced macrophage cytotoxicity (Luo and Knudson, 2010) . However, knowledge of the mechanism of cell-cell contact-mediated killing is limited. BCG infection may upregulate adhesion molecules, such as lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) or apoptosis-inducing molecules, such as Fas ligand and TRAIL on macrophages (DesJardin et al., 2002; Diehl et al., 2004) . Soluble factors released from BCG-activated human monocytes/macrophages contributed to the total killing of bladder cancer UCRU-BL-17 cells more than effector-target cell contact (Pryor et al., 1995) . NMAAP1-transfected RAW264.7 cells exhibited profound toxic effects on tumor cells, especially the induction of tumor cell apoptosis. Cytotoxicity was also enhanced through the secretion of iNOS, TNF-α, and IL-6. However, tumoricidal effects on tumor cells through cell-to-cell contact were not detected. This result may be because NMAAP1 could not regulate the tumoricidal membrane protein expression on macrophages. Activated macrophages engulf tumor cells via antibody-mediated phagocytosis (Overdijk et al., 2015) . The effect of increased phagocytic ability suggests that NMAAP1 plays an important role in the clearing of tumor cells and invading pathogens (Das et al., 2014) , and it may enhance the expression of some adhesive molecules and IgG receptors (DesJardin et al., 2002; Shi et al., 2015) .
NMAAP1 is a membrane-associated protein that contains an open-reading frame (ORF) that encodes a peptide of 555 amino acids and a small portion of the MAB-21 domain that is expressed in a wide range of tissues (Zhao et al., 2011) . Members of the MAB-21 family control cellular differentiation in C. elegans, Danio rerio, and Mus musculus (Heanue and Pachnis, 2006; Yamada et al., 2004) .
NMAAP1 bears a similar amino acid sequence to the human protein kiaa1754, which is a regulatory protein for inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-receptor activity. The kiaa1754 protein is a membrane-associated IP3R-binding protein that physiologically binds IP3R to regulate calcium release and neuronal process outgrowth in neuronal cell lineages (van Rossum et al., 2006) . We hypothesized that NMAAP1 shared a regulatory activity on IP3R and played an important role via IP3R-mediated calcium signaling to trigger the differentiation of certain macrophage subpopulations and prompt phagocytic and tumoricidal activities of macrophage.
Various factors, including cytokines/chemokines, hormones, and external biomechanical stimuli affect macrophage phenotype. The mechanism of actions of these factors is related to calcium signaling (Collins and Meyer, 2009; Evans and Fake, 2007; Través et al., 2013) . Ca 2+ is a highly versatile intracellular signaling messenger that regulates many different cellular processes during the entire cell lifespan, such as cell differentiation, proliferation, secretion and synaptic plasticity. Recent reports demonstrate that several molecules, such as DANGER (van Rossum et al., 2006) , cytochrome c (Boehning et al., 2003; 2005) , polyglutamine expanded huntingtin (Htt exp ) and huntingtin-associated protein-1A (Tang et al., 2003) , strictly regulate Ca 2+ release activity via binding to IP3R in physiological and pathological situations.
These results demonstrated that BCG increased NMAAP1 expression in macrophages, and NMAAP1 may promote the polarization of M1 macrophages, which exhibit tumoricidal activities through the secretion of inducible mediators.

The ketolide class of antibacterial agents includes 14-membered ring macrolides that differ from erythromycin A in that they have a 3-keto group instead of the L-cladinose moiety in the lactone ring. Telithromycin was the first ketolide to be developed for clinical use. Another ketolide, cethromycin (formerly ABT-773), has a cyclic carbamate group at the 11, 12-position in addition to the 3-keto group. This antimicrobial agent exhibits good antibacterial activity against a broad range of respiratory pathogens, including multiresistant Streptococcus pneumoniae and staphylococci, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Legionella spp. and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. 1, 2 Chlamydia pneumoniae is recognized as an important pathogen of respiratory tract infections worldwide, is a common cause of pneumonia, bronchitis, pharyngitis and sinusitis, and is responsible for almost 10% of cases of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). 3 The in vitro activity of macrolides and telithromycin against C. pneumoniae is variable, with clarithromycin showing the lowest MICs followed by telithromycin, azithromycin and erythromycin A. [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] However, the available data on the activity of cethromycin against C. pneumoniae are limited. 4 Therefore, we compared the in vitro activities of cethromycin and other macrolides and telithromycin against five standard strains and 15 wild-type Japanese isolates of C. pneumoniae.

The antimicrobial agents tested were erythromycin A (Shionogi Co., Osaka, Japan), clarithromycin (Taisho Pharmaceutical Co., Osaka, Japan), azithromycin (Pfizer Pharmaceutical Co., Tokyo, Japan), telithromycin (Aventis Pharma Co., Tokyo, Japan) and cethromycin (Dainabbott Laboratories, Osaka, Japan). Solutions of the agents were prepared following the manufacturers' instructions.
Twenty C. pneumoniae isolates were used in this study. TW-183, AR-39 and AR-388 were obtained from the Washington Research Foundation, Seattle, WA, USA. IOL-207 and Kajaani-6 were acquired from P. Saikku, National Public Health Institute, Oulu, Finland. Fifteen wild-type isolates (designated KKpn-1 to KKpn-15) were also tested, which were isolated from nasopharyngeal swab specimens collected from patients with acute respiratory tract infections at Kawasaki Medical School Hospital, Japan. The organisms from these clinical samples were positively stained with C. pneumoniae-specific monoclonal antibody. These clinical isolates were morphologically different from TWAR (TW-183, AR-39 and AR-388) strains from the United States (examples are given in Figure 1 ). 3 KKpn-15 elementary bodies (EBs) have a narrow periplasmic space and 
One millilitre of culture medium [Eagle's minimal essential medium (Nissui Pharmaceuticals Co., Tokyo, Japan) and 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (GIBCO BRL Life Technologies Inc., Grand Island, NY, USA)] containing 10 5 HEp-2 cells per mL were dispensed into each well of plastic 24-well culture plates, which were then incubated in 5% CO 2 at 35°C for 48 h. After confirming growth of a confluent monolayer, the culture fluid was removed from the wells by aspiration. Next, 10 4 inclusion-forming units per mL of each chlamydial strain were inoculated into each well. Then the plates were centrifuged at 900g for 60 min, and 1 mL of each preparation of the culture medium containing 1 mg/L cycloheximide (Nakarai Tesque Inc., Tokyo, Japan) and one concentration (final concentrations; range from 0.008 to 2 mg/L) of the test antibiotic were dispensed into each well. After incubation in 5% CO 2 at 35°C for 72 h, the cultures were fixed and stained for inclusions with the fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated monoclonal antibody specific for the chlamydial genus-specific antigen (Chlamydia FA Seiken; Denka Seiken, Tokyo, Japan). The MIC was defined as the lowest concentration at which no inclusions were found. The MCCs were determined by aspirating the antibiotic-containing medium, washing the wells twice with phosphate-buffered saline, and adding antibiotic-free medium. The infected cells were frozen at -70°C, thawed, passed onto new cells, incubated for 72 h, and then fixed and stained as described above. The MCC was the lowest antibiotic concentration resulting in no inclusions after passage. All tests were run in triplicate. Antichlamydial activity was determined when the same results were observed in at least two out of three experiments.
The MIC and MCC ranges of cethromycin and the other antimicrobial agents for C. pneumoniae used in this study are shown in Table 1 . The MICs and MCCs of cethromycin for the 20 C. pneumoniae isolates both ranged between 0.016 and 0.031 mg/L. The MICs of cethromycin, telithromycin, clarithromycin, azithromycin and erythromycin A at which 90% of the isolates were inhibited (MIC 90 ) were 0.016, 0.063, 0.063, 0.25 and 0.25 mg/L, respectively. The MCC 90 of cethromycin was also 0.016 mg/L. Cethromycin was the most active antibiotic tested in this study.
C. pneumoniae is a well-known respiratory pathogen that causes upper and lower respiratory tract infections and pneumonia. Macrolides and ketolides have been demonstrated to be active in vitro against C. pneumoniae. [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] We have previously reported on the experimental effectiveness of macrolides against acute chlamydial respiratory tract infections. 6, 7 The therapeutic effect of a 7 day course of clarithromycin at doses of 5 and 10 mg/kg body weight administered orally twice daily and of azithromycin at a dose of 10 mg/kg body weight administered orally once daily to mice with experimental Chlamydia psittaci pneumonia was excellent, with a 100% survival rate at 14 or 21 days after infection. This finding was the same as that for treatment with minocycline administered at 10 mg/kg twice daily. 6, 7 Recently, Hammerschlag et al. 9 reported a study assessing the efficacy of cethromycin for treatment of C. pneumoniae pneumonia. They found a 100% efficacy in eradication of the organism from the nasopharynx of patients with CAP. Telithromycin (given at a dosage of 800 mg once daily for 7-10 days) also showed good clinical efficacy against CAP due to C. pneumoniae. 10, 11 However, the diagnosis of C. pneumoniae infection in these telithromycin studies was based entirely on serology, not culture. Clinical studies on erythromycin A, clarithromycin and azithromycin in which cultures were carried out demonstrated that these macrolides are effective drugs for the treatment of respiratory infection associated with C. pneumoniae. 12, 13 The available data on the activity of cethromycin against C. pneumoniae are limited. Strigl et al. 4 found that both the MIC 50 and MIC 90 values of cethromycin against 20 isolates of C. pneumoniae including two reference strains, TW-183 and AR-39, were 0.015 mg/L.The MIC 90 and MCC 90 against 20 isolates of C. pneumoniae found in our study are also consistent with their report. Based on the above 
on results of serial measurements of copeptin level it has been suggested that the increased copept in concentration or trend to elevation of one area independent risk factor for long-term HF-related clinical outcomes and sudden death in patients with established CV disease [11] [12] [13] .Being able to better predict all-cause mortality rate and HF-related risks including death and admission to the hospital copeptin might be considered as much more accurate biomarker than natriuretic peptides for optimize medical care in HF patients [14, 15] . Unfortunately, there are large body of evidence regarding that the level of copeptin might relate closely to some metabolic abnormalities including hyperglycemia that sufficiently limits the predictive power of the biomarker in serial measurements especially in patients with diabetes and obesity [14, 16] . However, the improvement of diagnostic reliability of copeptin may achieve by means use of combined biomarker strategy, in particular it might be based on copeptin and natriuretic peptides (N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, midregional pro-atrial natriuretic peptide) [17, 18] . Finally, circulating level of copeptinare now recognized a promising biomarker with better discriminative value for both all-cause mortality and HF-related outcomes general population and individuals with established CV disease.
The main biological role of heart type of FABP (hFABP) is to facilitate the long-chain fatty acids reuptake, attenuate calcium transport in cardiomyocytes and regulate inflammatory response in reply to some lipid signals [19] . hFABP is predominantly expressed in cardiomyocytes and is powerful biomarker of myocardial injury. Recent studies have shown that the hFABP has better predicted CV outcomes to other biomarkers of cardiac damage, i.e. myoglobin and high-sensitive troponins [3, 14, 20] , whereas elevated intestinal FABP would identify patients with advanced HF who had severe fluid retention and intestinal congestion [21] . Overall, the H-FABP may better provide prognostic information on survival and more precise reflecta risk of major CV events during hospitalization period and short-time after discharge than natriuretic peptides, cardiac troponins and galectin-3. However, the role of several types of FABP in HF is not fully clear. Large clinical studies are required to more accurately explain the predictive value of these biomarkers.
Growth differentiation factor (GDF)-15 belongs to the super family of transforming growth factor-β [22] . GDF-15 is widely expressed on the surfaces of various cells. In HF GDF-15 is secreted by injured cardiomyocytesin response to ischemia, reperfusion, inflammatory cytokine stimulation and exposure to biomechanical stress [14] . Elevated level of circulating GDF-15 was found in HF individuals irrespectively etiology of cardiac dysfunction [23] . There is strong evidence regarding being tight interrelationship between circulating level of GDF-15 and HF signs and symptoms, reduced left ventricular ejection fraction [24] . Although serial biomarker evaluation has not showed superiority of incremental predictive ability in GDF-15 versus natriuretic peptides in acute HF [25] , in chronic HF multiple marker strategy based on GDF-15, galectin-3 and natriuretic peptides might exhibit several advantages before conventional approach in ability to predict all-cause mortality, CV mortality and HF-related outcomes in outpatients with HF [26, 27] . Finally, there are several controversies regarding importance of predictive value for survival and incremental prognostication in diagnosis of HF. There is need in larger clinical studies with higher statistical power and head-to-head comparison of biomarkers to clear their role in diagnosis and guided therapy of HF.
Although recent clinical trials have been exhibited much more information regarding biomarker use in prognostication of HF, there is considerable limitation in head-to-head comparison of several biomarkers and biomarker-based strategy to treat of HF. All these are a cause of some speculations around advantages and shortcomings of biomarker-based management of HF including new biological indicators, such as procalcitonin, copeptin, hFABP and GDF-15. Novel biomarkers are needed to be investigated in details, while there is suggestion that multiple biomarker models would be better in prediction HF evolution and outcomes than even single brand new biomarker.
(Periodic acid-Schiff, tartrazine, 
Whether and if so how plants respond to increasing atmospheric CO 2 is critical for future ecosystem carbon and water cycling and largely depends on the response of the stomata that control both carbon (C) uptake and water loss. Several authors have suggested that water-related effects of elevated CO 2 (eCO 2 ) on stomatal closure might be or become more important than immediate effects on carbon uptake (Morgan et al., 2003; Holtum and Winter, 2010; Hartmann, 2011) . One reason for this may be that while stimulated growth and biomass accumulation rarely persist over many years (Körner et al., 2005; Norby et al., 2010; Leuzinger et al., 2011b) , but see McCarthy et al. (2010) , stomatal responses tend to be sustained (see Holtum and Winter, 2010 for a review). For grassland, there is compelling experimental evidence that stimulated biomass production under eCO 2 is in fact a consequence of soil water savings resulting from reduced stomatal conductance (Niklaus et al., 1998; Morgan et al., 2004) . Such a water-mediated CO 2 -effect is expected to be more pronounced in water-limited ecosystems, although under extremely dry conditions it has not been observed (Housman et al., 2006) . The experimental conditions (species composition tested, CO 2 -administration method, laboratory vs. field experiment, ontogenetic stage of test plants) and particularly the experimental duration are fundamental for the interpretation of net water use under eCO 2 (Norby et al., 1999) . For example, initial CO 2 -induced increases in total leaf area per unit land area leaf area index, (LAI) in young, rapidly expanding systems will inevitably lead to increased stand transpiration, irrespective of the leaf-level stomatal response (Uddling et al., 2008; Tricker et al., 2009) . Similarly, the long-term response (>10 years) often differs from measurements over only a few years (Körner, 2006) . The scaling from first-order stomatal responses to stand water use therefore requires careful consideration of the interactions between the water-and the carbon cycle across temporal and spatial scales.
Overall, there is a striking lack of data from mature forests as most of the evidence for water savings under eCO 2 still comes from grass-or shrub ecosystems, or from branch bag experiments on mature trees (Roberntz and Stockfors, 1998; Pataki et al., 2000; Morgan et al., 2004) . No eCO 2 experiments on tall trees exist in the tropical forests (Körner, 2009) . Worldwide, there are only five experiments testing the effect of future CO 2 concentrations on entire tree crowns using the free air CO 2 enrichment (FACE) method (Körner et al., 2005; Norby et al., 2005) , excluding whole tree chamber and agricultural experiments (Medhurst et al., 2006; Kimball et al., 2007) . Although those five studies were conducted with different species and in a variety of biomes, three of them roughly agree on reduced total stand water use under eCO 2 of c. 10% (Warren et al., 2011) . The remaining two were young, expanding systems where the transpiration response to CO 2 was dominated by a stimulation of LAI and therefore increased stand water use (Uddling et al., 2008; Tricker et al., 2009 ). Responses in leaf-level stomatal conductance (g s ) to eCO 2 are less consistent in the five large forest FACE experiments mentioned (−4% to −44%), but approximately match findings from meta-analyses including experiments with woody plants in branch bag and greenhouse experiments (−21% Medlyn et al., 2001, −18% Ainsworth and Rogers, 2007 , and no significant response from a much earlier review predominantly on seedlings and saplings, Curtis and Wang, 1998) . At the Swiss Canopy Crane (SCC), where the present study was conducted, stomatal conductance was reduced around 10% in six deciduous tree species, and sap flow by 2-22%, resulting in a reduction of yearly stand transpiration of c. 10% (Cech et al., 2003; Keel et al., 2007; Leuzinger and Körner, 2007) . Overall, water savings under eCO 2 tend to decline with the duration of the experiment (Medlyn et al., 2001; Leuzinger and Körner, 2010; Leuzinger et al., 2011b) , with increasing woodiness (Ainsworth and Rogers, 2007) , with increasing age of the studied plants (Medlyn et al., 2001) , and from deciduous to coniferous trees (Ellsworth, 1999; Körner et al., 2007) . Because the number of short-term experiments with herbaceous or young trees is disproportionately larger than the number of experiments with mature trees, we can assume that water savings under eCO 2 tend to be overestimated, particularly because the response is likely to diminish further when scaling up from the individual plant to the landscape level (McNaughton and Jarvis, 1991; Field et al., 1995; Leuzinger and Körner, 2010) . A way to circumvent the necessity of scaling up CO 2 -experiments with young, disturbed systems is 13 C analysis of tree rings to infer intrinsic water use efficiency (iWUE, Francey and Farquhar, 1982; Bert et al., 1997) . Penuelas et al. (2011) in a recent review report that iWUE has increased by c. 20% over the past 40 years, with slightly larger responses in broad-leaved relative to coniferous trees. On the other hand, in a study on various species of oak, hornbeam and maple, no change in iWUE was reported based on only 2-3 leaf samples during the twentieth century (MillerRushing et al., 2009 ). Changes in iWUE may originate either from changes in the nominator (leaf-level photosynthesis) or the denominator (stomatal conductance), and thus cannot be used to fill in the lack of FACE experiments to estimate changes in stand transpiration under future CO 2 concentrations. Experimental estimates of leaf-level and whole tree responses are also key to algorithms and their parameterization in dynamic global vegetation models (DGVMs) and earth system models, and therefore predictions of future vegetation responses and climate feedbacks (Moorcroft, 2006) . Stomatal conductance models used in DGVMs predict substantial decreases of g s with a doubling of atmospheric CO 2 , fundamentally because the substomatal CO 2 concentration (C i ) is held approximately constant (Jarvis, 1976; Leuning, 1995; Haxeltine and Prentice, 1996) . It is therefore little surprising that DGVMs predict global water savings by the vegetation of around 10-20% (Luo et al., 2008) , which lead to increased runoff of mostly a few percent (e.g., Betts et al., 2007; Boucher et al., 2009; Long et al., 2010) , matching estimates based on experimental data (Leuzinger and Körner, 2010) . However, it is important to note that few of these model results can be validated due to a lack of data, and net responses largely hinge on the way the leaf-level response is scaled up to the canopy and landscape scale. The aim of the present study is to (1) provide novel data on water relations of fully grown Norway spruce (Picea abies) trees under approximately double pre-industrial CO 2 -conditions, and (2) to discuss these findings in context of simulations of the experiment by the DGVM LPJ-GUESS (Smith et al., 2001; Sitch et al., 2003) .

The SCC is located in a mature, mixed deciduous forest 15 km south of Basel, Switzerland (47 • 28 N, 7 • 30 E, 550 m a.s.l.). The crane gondola allows access to all tree crowns located within the 30 m radius of the jib. The site has a mean January temperature of 2 • C and mean July temperature of 19 • C, long-term average annual precipitation amounts to 990 mm, two-thirds of which fall during the growing season. The oldest trees are c. 110 years old and reach heights of 35-40 m. Stand density is 415 trees ha −1 (trees >0.1 m breast height diameter), at a stem basal area of 46 m 2 ha −1 and a LAI of c. 5. The soil type is a Rendzic Leptosol (WRB) (Rendzina, FAO; Lithic Rendoll, USDA) with an accessible profile depth of at most 25 cm followed by rocky subsoil blending into the calcareous bedrock at 40-90 cm. The soil texture is a loamy clay (pH 5.8 in the top 10 cm). The species mixture includes deciduous trees (Fagus sylvatica L., Quercus petraea (Matt.) Liebl., Carpinus betulus L., and, less abundant, Tilia platyphyllos Scop., Acer campestre L., Prunus avium L.) as well as conifers (Picea abies (L.) Karst., Larix decidua Mill., Pinus sylvestris L., Abies alba Mill.). For more information on the site see (Pepin and Körner, 2002) .
Five Norway spruce (P. abies) individuals were selected for CO 2 enrichment (550 ppm), together with five control trees, only three of which were accessible with the crane gondola. The treatment was initiated on July 30, 2009. To simulate future atmospheric conditions, pure CO 2 was released through laser-punched irrigation tubes woven into the spruce trees with a central supply pipe running up the stem. Sample lines were connected to two infrared gas analyzers (LI-800, Li-Cor, Lincoln, NE, USA), in order to monitor and automatically adjust the amount of CO 2 supplied. CO 2 enrichment was discontinued when daily temperature maxima did not reach 6 • C, or when above-canopy incoming radiation was less than 100 µmol m −2 s −1 (i.e., no night-time CO 2 enrichment). On average, the target CO 2 concentration of 550 ppm was achieved well: the mean across all sample lines during times of fumigation reached 563 ppm ± 94 s.e. in 2009 and 617 ppm ± 88 in 2010.
We continuously measured sap flow, stem radius changes, microclimate, and soil moisture. One heat dissipation sap flow sensor (TDP-30, Dynamax, Huston, TX, USA) was used per tree (5 treated, 5 controls), inserted directly into the stem after removing loose bits of bark. The sensors were oriented toward north, water-proofed with silicon paste and insulated with styrofoam and reflecting foil. They remained in the same position for both the 2009 and 2010 growing seasons. Stem radius changes (µm) were recorded with high-precision point dendrometers (ZB06, Natkon, Hombrechtikon, Switzerland), and, together with the sap flow signals, logged to two central data loggers (DL2e, Delta-T Devices Ltd., Cambridge, UK) in 10 min intervals (average over 30 s readings). Soil moisture was logged every 6 h at 0-10 cm depth using "ECH 2 O Probes" (EC-10, Decagon Devices Ltd., Pullman, Washington, DC). Eleven sensors were distributed around the treated trees, 18 sensors around control trees, logging onto self-contained data loggers (Em50, Decagon). Measurements took place from day of year 134 to 297 (May 14-October 24) in 2009 and from day of year 134 to 267 (May 14-September 24) in 2010. Microclimate (temperature, relative humidity, incoming radiation, and precipitation) was logged above the canopy in 10-min intervals to a DL2e logger (Delta-T Devices Ltd.). Data gaps resulting from occasional logger failure were filled by interpolation based on climate recordings from a nearby weather station (2 km air-line distance).
On three cloudless days (July 29, August 6 2009, and July 14 2010), we measured daily courses (five measurements per tree pre-dawn to dusk) of leaf water potential and stomatal conductance on the five treated trees and the three controls that were accessible with the crane gondola. Two twigs per tree and time window were cut off with a razor blade, needles, bark, and phloem around the cut were removed, and their leaf water potential was measured subsequently using a pressure chamber (SKPM 1400, Skye Instruments, Powys, UK). Only plant material from the fully light-exposed top crown was selected to ensure comparable conditions. Stomatal conductance was measured on current and previous year's needles, removing the needles on two c. 2 cm wide bands to allow the gas-exchange chamber to close. A portable photosynthesis system (LI-6400 XT, LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA) with a conifer chamber was used for this purpose. Readings were taken as soon as rates of net photosynthesis and stomatal conductance remained stable (<5 min). All measurements were taken at full sunlight (>1000 µmol m −2 s −1 ). Treated trees were measured at their target CO 2 concentration of 560 ppm, control trees at ambient CO 2 (390 ppm). Vapor pressure deficit (VPD) inside the cuvette was adjusted to ambient conditions. Stomatal conductance was calculated by multiplying the readings with the total leaf area of the samples (harvested at the end of the experiment). Because there were no systematic differences between current year and previous year needles, all analyzes presented here are based on the average values.
We used the DGVM LPJ-GUESS, featuring an accurate representation of detailed plant physiological processes (Smith et al., 2001; Sitch et al., 2003) , to simulate our experimental results. The model was run in cohort mode using daily climate data from an official Swiss weather station 11 km north of the study site (Basel-Binningen, Tank et al., 2002) . Relative humidity, radiation and temperature data correlated well with weather data recorded at the experimental site (R 2 -values equal to 0.86, 0.89, and 0.98 respectively), and specific correction factors were applied to simulate long climate time series at the experimental site as closely as possible. A 700-years spin-up period was allowed in order to equilibrate the various carbon pools with the background climate (data from 1901 to 1930 used repeatedly, CO 2 concentration at 296 ppm). Thereafter, we considered the period from 1901 to 2110. Atmospheric CO 2 concentration was altered in four different ways, all based on the actually measured mean values until 2010: (1) step change to 550 ppm in 2010, (2) step change to 700 ppm in 2010, (3) gradual change to 550 ppm until 2057, and (4) gradual change to 700 ppm until 2100. Because we only considered Norway spruce, only the plant functional type (PFT) "needle-leaved evergreen" was allowed to grow, all other PFTs were suppressed. Soil water storage capacity was set to 80 mm, which is the best estimate determined for a nearby site (see Walthert et al., 2004) . Only one patch with a size of 1000 m 2 was computed, hence no competition took place in order to simulate the responses of mature coniferous trees. Because forest fires are extremely rare in this region, fire disturbance was suppressed. No further parameter changes or adjustments were made relative to the default version of LPJ-GUESS (Sitch et al., 2003) .
Daily transpiration in LPJ is equal to the lower value out of daily water supply and daily water demand. If water supply < water demand, then the available soil water is transpired up to a maximum rate of 5 mm d −1 and thus independent of CO 2 . On the other hand, if water supply > water demand, stomatal conductance decreases with increasing CO 2 because C i /C a (intercellular to ambient CO 2 concentration) is held constant and photosynthesis is stimulated (Haxeltine and Prentice, 1996) . As a result, at a leaf temperature of 20 • C, stomatal conductance is reduced c. 35% at 2× pre-industrial CO 2 concentration. Transpiration is then calculated from potential evapotranspiration, stomatal conductance and two (constant) scaling parameters.
Stem water deficit was related to the individual's stem radius at the beginning of the experiment and expressed in per mille change from the initial value. The resulting time series were decomposed into radius changes due to changes in stem water storage and a growth component according to the method outlined in (Zweifel et al., 2005) . Essentially, this method considers periods between stem radius peaks as stem water deficits (see Figure 1 of Zweifel et al., 2005) .
Millivolt signals of sap flow sensors were processed as follows to achieve most realistic conditions of zero-flow (R. Zweifel, personal communication): the maximum mV values were converted to temperature differences ( T) using a constant factor of 25. Then, T maxima between 3 h and 8 h every night were connected with a straight line. This linearly changing baseline ( T max ) was used as the pre-nightly maximum value as in the standard transformation outlined in (Granier, 1985) . Because sap flow signals are difficult to interpret as absolute mass flow densities, particularly when exact estimates of the sap wood width and the radial flow distribution are lacking Leuzinger et al., 2011a) , we chose to use only relative sap flow values (Figure 1) . Each sap flow time series was therefore standardized to its own pre-treatment maximum (mean of 20 largest values) resulting in time series between 0 and approximately 1, spanning both growing seasons (henceforth called "relative sap flow"). To test treatment-specific differences in daily courses of leaf water potential and stomatal conductance, we used mixed effects models (R package "nlme") with treatment and time of day as fixed effects and tree as a random effect. Additionally, we used an autoregressive moving average (ARMA) correlation structure to model dependence among observations. The relationship between stem water deficit ( W) and soil moisture (sm) was modeled individually for the pre-treatment and the two FACE periods (season 2009 and 2010) using a 2-parameter Michaelis-Menten-type hyperbola: W = a × sm/ (b + sm), where "a" is the asymptote and "b" the soil moisture level at which stem water deficit reaches half of its asymptotic value (Figure 3) .
Generally, we tested statistically significant differences between treatments by fitting models with common parameter estimates and varying parameter estimates for each treatment, followed by a comparison of the two models (Figures 2, 4, and 5) . The CO 2 -treatment was considered to affect the variable of interest statistically significantly, if the Akaike information criterion (AIC) was significantly lower in the more complex model (i.e., AIC > 2). To determine the envelope curves for the sap flow-VPD relationships, we calculated the 95th percentiles of relative sap flow (SF 95 ) for every 2 kPa VPDVPD bin and fitted the poly-
, since all other attempts to fit a non-linear model failed. The factor CO 2 is the CO 2 -treatment with the levels 1 (elevated) and 0 (ambient). The interaction term VPD ×CO 2 was not significant and was therefore dropped. All analyzes were carried out using R version 2.13.0 (R Development Core Team, 2011).
A comparison of the seasonal relative sap flow sums (median of both treated and control groups) did not show any change when the pre-treatment period was compared to the CO 2 enrichment period. (Table 1, Figure 1) . The pattern did not differ when wet and dry periods were considered separately (both by soil moisture and VPD conditions). Before the treatment was initiated, the trees designated to be treated with eCO 2 tended to show less transpiration (Wilcoxon rank sum test, p = 0.055, Table 1) .
A more detailed look at the daily courses of sap flow, leaf water potential, and stomatal conductance during bright sunny days before and after the start of the treatment confirmed that water consumption in P. abies remained unaffected by CO 2 enrichment. Daily courses of sap flow were not significantly different between treatments, neither before nor after treatment initiation (daily sums of relative sap flow, Wilcoxon rank-sum test, n = 5, p-values = 0.90, 0.90, 0.79 for left, center and right panel of Figure 2A ). Similarly, leaf water potential and stomatal conductance differed with time of day (p-values < 0.0001 for both years and measurements) but not with the treatment: we employed linear mixed effects models with treatment, time and their interaction as fixed factors and tree individuals as random factors. Except for the leaf water potential measurements during the pretreatment period (left panel of Figure 2B ), where the interaction term was significant (p = 0.022), the treatment differences were not significantly different during any day (Figures 2B,C, p-values > 0.1). In both summers, low soil water availability resulted in low pre-dawn leaf water potentials around −1 MPa. During daytime, high VPD values exceeding 2 kPa caused leaf water potentials to drop to values between −1.5 and −2.0 MPa. Stomatal conductance peaked with light intensity and reached values about 100 mmol m −2 s −1 and declined in the course of the afternoon to values below 50 mmol m −2 s −1 .
Overall, sap flow was lower on July 14 2010 because of the very high VPD values (maximum of c. 3.5 kPa). All 3 days were cloudless, except for some haziness in the afternoon of July 14 2010. The dent in photoactive radiation (PAR) around 10 am is due to passing shadow from the crane top.
Point dendrometer data showed that growth was initiated in mid-April (day of year 135) and ended in mid-August (day of year 230) in 2009, with no systematic difference between treatments (defined as the day when 10% of the yearly growth increment was reached, Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p = 0.4). Stem water deficit derived from dendrometer readings did not differ systematically between the two groups ( Figure 3A) . Soil moisture under CO 2 -enriched trees tended to be higher than under control trees, but this difference was already present before the onset of the treatment in the first year and disappeared in the second year ( Figure 3B) . Decreasing mean daily soil moisture generally increased mean daily stem water deficit sharply, but as judged by the AIC the pattern did not change between the two groups, neither before nor after the start of the CO 2 -treatment (Figure 4) . Stem storage saturation occurred at a wide spectrum of soil moisture contents, but depleted stem water reservoirs only occurred at low soil moisture values (<25 Vol. %, Figure 4) . We also looked at the relative sap flow response to VPD according to experimental period (before and after treatment initiation). The 95th percentiles per 2 kPa bin did not differ between treatments, both before and after CO 2 enrichment, because the interaction between VPD and CO 2 in the polynomial model fits was statistically not significant ( Figure 5 ).
Given the commonly implemented algorithms controlling leaf gas exchange in dynamic vegetation models, it can be expected that any PFT will show less water use under eCO 2 (Farquhar et al., 1980) . To see whether and to what extent this is the case in the commonly used DGVM LPJ-GUESS, we simulated our experiment with local climate data. We suppressed all other plant functional types but "needle-leaved evergreen." The CO 2 concentration for the 700-years spin-up was kept at 296 ppm. After 1901, the four CO 2 -scenarios outlined in the section "materials and methods" were imposed. The daily transpiration rates were sensitive to the final CO 2 concentrations reached (550 ppm or 700 ppm), but only little to whether a step or gradual change in the CO 2 concentration was used. Overall, there was c. 10% less transpiration in the 550 ppm scenario and c. 17% less transpiration in the 700 ppm scenario, regardless of how the concentration was reached or how long the new atmospheric conditions lasted ( Table 1) .
We aimed to assess the response of whole-tree water relations to future levels of atmospheric CO 2 in Norway spruce, one of the most abundant and economically important coniferous tree species in Europe. Using five different, fully independent approaches (sap flow-, dendrometer-, leaf water potential-, and soil moisture measurements), our experimental data shows that this species is unlikely to adjust its water use under atmospheric CO 2 concentrations anticipated to occur in c. 2050. This stands in contrast to the model results of the DGVM LPJ-GUESS, which predicts a c. 10% reduction in transpiration when simulating needle-leaved evergreen trees under CO 2 concentrations and site conditions matching those of the field experiment. Because of the wide distribution across Europe and Asia and its importance as a timber species the lack of a water use response of Norway spruce to elevated atmospheric CO 2 is fundamental for the parameterization and validation of DGVMs and fully coupled earth system models predicting the future water and carbon cycle. Further, it is central to our understanding of plant responses to eCO 2 and how they are scaled with ontogeny and the successional stage of the tested species or community. Critical to the estimates of net plant water use under eCO 2 seem to be the developmental stage of the tested individuals, the species and PFT tested, the duration of the treatment, the method of CO 2 administration, and the nature and timing of the measured traits used as a proxy to estimate plant water use ( Table 2 ). All these factors will have an impact on the net response of plant water use to eCO 2 . Despite the large range of responses reported, the majority of studies tend to predict a decrease in stomatal conductance and therefore net water use under eCO 2 (e.g., Curtis and Wang, 1998; Medlyn et al., 2001 ). However, there are numerous examples that show no response or even an increase in water www.frontiersin.org
October 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 229 | 7 Plant functional type Decrease from herbaceous to woody plants and from deciduous to coniferous trees Saxe et al., 1998; Medlyn et al., 2001; Ainsworth and Rogers, 2007 Combination with other global change drivers Trend for decrease Leuzinger et al., 2011b Scaling from plant to canopy/landscape Decrease with increasing scale Field et al., 1995; Wullschleger et al., 2002 Upscaling from experimental period to yearly average response
Responses-dependent on weather conditions, average water use often lower than if extrapolated linearly from experimental period Wullschleger and Norby, 2001; Cech et al., 2003; Leuzinger and Körner, 2007 Soil feedback Decrease (through wetter soils) Schäfer et al., 2002 The circumstances that lead to this decline can generally be associated with a more realistic scenario (young vs. mature stands, local vs. global scale response etc.) use under eCO 2 . For P. abies, the species tested in the present study, Roberntz and Stockfors (1998) found no effect on g s using branch bags, and Barton et al. (1993) , Kupper et al. (2006) and Uddling et al. (2009) all report an increase in water use under eCO 2 from glasshouse and branch bag experiments. For Pinus taeda, both a branch-bag and an open-top chamber experiment suggest that this species does not respond to eCO 2 in its water use (Teskey, 1995; Pataki et al., 1998) . Contrary to grassland experiments, Domec et al. (2009) found reduced stomatal conductance under eCO 2 in tall, 28 years old Pinus taeda individuals only at high soil moisture, and no response during dry conditions. In trees that are in an early (expanding) successional stage, increased LAI under eCO 2 may periodically (over-) compensate reductions in stomatal conductance (Li et al., 2003) or lead to an increase in total water use (Bobich et al., 2010) . Increasing LAI following CO 2 -treatment has been reported for a closedcanopy Pinus taeda stand growing at the Duke experimental forest (McCarthy et al., 2007) . However, this canopy response to eCO 2 was determined by nitrogen availability patterns and additional N fertilization trials suggested that LAI stimulation is unlikely to occur at high fertility sites (McCarthy et al., 2007) . Most other eCO 2 studies suggest that CO 2 will not cause an increase in LAI in mature systems (Bader et al., in preparation; Körner et al., 2005; Norby et al., 2005; Warren et al., 2011) . Hättenschwiler and Körner (1997) even found a lower LAI under eCO 2 in a young, closed-canopy Norway spruce stand, similar to what tropical tree model ecosystems revealed after stand closure (Körner and Arnone, 1992) . Furthermore, a LAI beyond c. 2.7 will not affect canopy conductance (Schulze et al., 1994) . Given the age of our study trees (>100 years) and the nutrient-rich soil they thrive on, it seems improbable that CO 2 enrichment will enhance LAI in this stand.
We argue that the majority of the evidence underlying the existing reviews on plant water savings under eCO 2 experiments (Curtis and Wang, 1998; Medlyn et al., 2001; Ainsworth and Long, 2005; Ainsworth and Rogers, 2007) rests on short-term (sub-seasonal) experiments, predominantly on grasslands, tree seedlings or juveniles tested under relatively confined conditions (e.g., glasshouses). However, these test conditions tend to overestimate the effects of eCO 2 on stomatal conductance and/or water use and potential long-term alterations such as structural changes in the hydraulic pathway as have been reported for Pinus taeda at the Duke FACE site may remain undetected ( Table 2 ; Domec et al., 2009) .
Another source for overestimating water use under eCO 2 is temporal upscaling from an experimental period shorter than or non-representative of a whole year Körner, 2007, 2010) . Often, the response strongly depends on the weather and soil moisture conditions (Wullschleger and Norby, 2001; Cech et al., 2003) . Our study, together with others (Ellsworth, 1999; Schäfer et al., 2002; Bernacchi et al., 2003; Keel et al., 2007; Uddling et al., 2009) , supports the view that near-natural conditions tend to yield a smaller or no response in annual water use to elevated CO 2 .
Apart from the obvious absence of a CO 2 -response in the water flux of our experimental trees, the patterns found (Figure 2 ) match with earlier reports on water relations of P. abies (e.g., Gross and Koch, 1991; Zweifel et al., 2001) . The low pre-dawn shoot water potentials around −1 MPa resulted from a combination of soil water deficits and the hydrostatic water potential of c. 0.4 MPa. The diurnal courses of water relations also showed tight stomatal control over transpiration, preventing midday shoot water potentials from dropping below −1.9 MPa. This rather isohydric behavior allowed the maintenance of an adequate hydraulic safety margin from the critical threshold of −2.5 MPa that has been reported as turgor loss point (Gross and Koch, 1991) and as the level at which significant xylem cavitation occurs in branches of adult Norway spruce trees (Cochard, 1992; Lu et al., 1995) . Compared to the first day of measurements (Figure 2 , left panels), stomatal conductance decreased due to lower soil moisture or higher VPD, causing considerably less sap flow (Figure 2 , middle and right panels). The incomplete night-time recovery of stem radius during times of low soil moisture (<30 vol. %) and high VPD suggests that internal water storage tissues could not be replenished and is thus indicative of a tree water deficit (Zweifel et al., 2005 Figure 3) . We have no explanation for the high predawn stomatal conductance measured in the morning of July 14 (Figure 2) . The modeled reduction in water use by coniferous trees for this site stands in contrast to our in situ measurements. The LPJ-GUESS dynamic vegetation model consistently predicted between 9% and 18% reduced transpiration, with the ambient CO 2 concentration (C a , 550 ppm vs. 700 ppm) causing most of the sensitivity of the response and the mode of increase (step vs. gradual) as well as the duration of the new conditions (immediately after the increase vs. 100 years later) being rather insignificant. In LPJ-GUESS, but also in other dynamic vegetation models, the first-order response originates from the photosynthesis model through stomatal closure due to increased intercellular CO 2 concentrations (C i ). Because C i /C a is assumed constant, changes in C a will result in proportional changes in stomatal conductance. However, in LPJ-GUESS this effect only manifests itself during ample water supply (see section "Materials and Methods"). Therefore, the CO 2 -response does not increase with dry conditions, which has been found earlier (Hickler et al., 2008) , although a carry-over effect from wet to dry periods (higher available soil moisture under eCO 2 ) is possible. This behavior certainly does not mirror observations from grassland (Niklaus et al., 1998; Morgan et al., 2004 ) and the drought × eCO 2 interactions in trees do not seem to be uniform (Beerling et al., 1996; Heath, 1998; Cech et al., 2003; Leuzinger and Körner, 2007 and others) .
The key difference between photosynthesis models that are employed in dynamic vegetation models is essentially the formulation of C i /C a (Katul et al., 2000) . Therefore, the range of modeled responses is relatively narrow (Luo et al., 2008) and foreseeable, unless model-specific feedback mechanisms dampen or enhance the initial signal. For example, increased LAI through altered carbon allocation patterns, soil moisture, or atmospheric feedback (in a fully coupled model) could all contribute to changing the initial response largely prescribed by the photosynthesis model. The fact that our modeled water relations response to eCO 2 seems largely-independent of the time the eCO 2 -conditions are in place suggests that very little feedback mechanisms contribute to altering the first-order response, which seems to be stable across models and ecosystem types (Luo et al., 2008) . Another important component potentially responsible for mitigating the CO 2 -response are the leaf and canopy boundary layer resistances, which are in series with the stomatal resistance but not explicitly considered in LPJ-GUESS (McNaughton and Jarvis, 1991).
Clearly, there are limitations as to what conclusions can be drawn from a sample of five adult Norway spruce individuals treated with elevated atmospheric CO 2 over two seasons only. Such experiments struggle with the inherent trade-off between sample size and the realism of the experimental setting. While it may be more satisfying to get statistically more robust results on CO 2 -responses with young trees, we make little progress if young trees respond differently to mature trees (Medlyn et al., 2001; Uddling et al., 2009; Leuzinger et al., 2011a,b) . More data on water use under eCO 2 are needed from large-scale studies in mature systems to confirm our results. Equally important is the continuation of large-scale experiments over many years in order to alleviate some of the statistical shortcomings from originating from low replication.
In conclusion, we find a contrasting response between our experimental results with mature P. abies trees, and the model output from the global dynamic vegetation model LPJ-GUESS. Our experimental results are corroborated by evidence from studies on other plant functional types, and we argue that the more realistic the testing conditions, the smaller the water savings in response to eCO 2 . The modeled water relations response to eCO 2 was strikingly robust both in this and previous studies. Because the modeled responses are closer to the leaf-level than to the ecosystem response in experiments, one explanation for the apparent discrepancy is that the propagation of the response from the leaf to the ecosystem is not captured appropriately in the currently available models. Attempts should be made to account for such processes in models potentially mitigating first-order CO 2 -effects on plant water use.
Detailed information on sulphur metabolism in moulds was initiated by Steinberg's (1941) investigations into the utilization of various sulphurcontaining compounds by Aspergillus niger. He concluded that the reduction of such compounds is a normal preliminary process in inorganic sulphur utilization in this mould. Hockenhull (1948) obtained similar results for PeniciElium notatum and described two parathiotrophic mutants of this mould. Parathiotrophic mutants of Ophiostoma multiannulutum had previously been produced by Fries (1945) and parathiotrophy had been observed in the Saprolegniaceae by Volkonsky (1983) and in Staphylococcus uweus by Fildes & Richardson (1937). Hockenhull (1949) obtained a number of parafhiotrophic mutants of Aspergillus niduhns and, from their growth behaviour on a number of compounds, postulated that sulphate was metabolized to cysteine with the intermediate formation of sulphite, sulphoxylate, thiosulphate and cysteine-S-sulphonic acid. Phinney (1948) and Phinney, Fling, Sheng & Horowitz (1950) obtained evidence that in Newospora mama sulphite, thiosulphate, cysteic acid and cysteine sulphinic acid were intermediates between, sulphate and cysteine. In Escherichia coEi, the work of Lampen, Roepke dz Jones (1947) and of Cowie, Bolton & Sands (1950) indicated that suIphite, thiosulphate and possibly sulphide, were intermediates between sulphate and cysteine.
Kearney & Singer (1952 & Singer ( , 1953 and Singer & Kearney (1954) obtained evidence that in Prdeus vulgaris oxidation of cysteine to sulphate occurs with the intermediate formation of cysteine sulphinic acid, P-sulphinyl pyruvic acid and sulphite, while Chapeville & Fromageot (1954) have shown the formation of cysteine sulphinic acid from sulphite in rabbit kidney.
No experimental approach, using both metabolic studies and mutant studies simultaneously, has been made, and Aspergillus niddans appears to offer reasonable material for this purpose, as the starvation method of Pontecorvo (1958) enables large numbers of parathiotrophic mutants to be produced with relative ease. It was hoped that information gained by the above approach would make it possible to reconcile and amplify previous studies with both A. nidulans and other organisms. For growth studies, the mutants were grown on the above minimal medium supplemented with various sulphur compounds and biotin where necessary.

Enzyme preparations. The mycelium from the aerated shake culture was washed on a sintered-glass funnel with a large volume of distilled water, resuspended in 800 ml, distilled water and aerated for 5 hr. It was then filtered off and suspended in a large volume of ice-cold acetone. After standing overnight at O", the mycelium was again filtered on a sintered-glass funnel, washed with ice-cold acetone and ether and dried in wamo over sulphuric acid.
On a suggestion by Dr E. E. Snell, the mycelium was constantly aerated during all stages of manipulation until it was plunged into the ice-cold acetone. Lack of aeration during the filtration steps resulted in low and fluctuating activities in the acetone powders. Considerable endogenous production of cysteine was observed when mycelium was not starved in distilled water, Reaction mixture. The total reaction mixture volume was 10 ml. consisting of 5 ml. 0.067 M-phosphate buffer (pH 7-2) in which 100-200 mg. of acetone powder were suspended. Amino and keto acids and sulphur sources were added to a final concentration of 0.1 M, as sodium salts, and pyridoxal to a final concentration of 0.01 M.
Estimdioru. At the end of each experiment, the digest was centrifuged, the precipitate washed twice with 5 ml. distilIed water, and the washings and supernatant fluid combined. The precipitate was suspended in 10 ml. distilled water and heated for 10 min, in a boiling water bath. After cooling, solid material was removed by centrifugation. Cysteine and cystine were estimated directly on samples from the original supernatant fluid and on samples from the hot water extract by the method of Kassell & Brand (1988). The results were expressed as pg. cysteine, although the experimental manipulations led to the oxidation of varying proportions of the cysteine to cystine.
Chromatogruphy of amino acids. For the production of satisfactory chromatograms it was found necessary to treat the extracts in the following manner in order to remove inorganic sulphur compounds. To a sample of the hot water extract 0 . 1~ iodine solution was added until a faint yellow colour persisted; excess of saturated barium hydroxide solution was then added and carbon dioxide bubbled through the solution to remove excess barium hydroxide. The mixture was centrifuged and the supernatant fluid freeze-dried. After redissolving in 1-2 ml. water, 5-20 pl. samples were chromatographed on Whatman no. 1 paper, using n-butanol +acetic acid +water (4 : 1 : 5 ) or methanol + pyridine +water (6 : 2 : 2) as solvents. The chromatograms were dipped in 0.2 yo (w/v) ninhydrin in acetone and the colour developed by heating at 90" for 15 min.
Semi-quantitative measurements of the amount of amino acid present were made by cutting out the coloured spots, eluting with 4 ml. of acetone+water (8: 1) and measuring the colour in a Beckman Model DU spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 570 mp.
Reagents. Analytical grade reagents were used wherever possible. Cysteine, cystine, methionine, taurine, isethionic acid and pyridoxal were obtained from L, Light and Co. ; glutamic acid, aspartic acid and serine from Roche Products Ltd, ; and sodium formaldehyde sulphoxylate from Brotherton and Co. Ltd. All amino acids were used in the form of their L-isomers.
Cysteine sulphinic acid was prepared according to Levine (1986) , cysteic acid according to Shinohara (1932) , cystine disulphoxide according to Levine ( 1 9SS), cysteine-S-sulphonic acid according to Clarke (1932) (Hughes, 1951) , or by grinding with powdered alumina (McIlwain, Roper & Hughes, 1948) showed negligible activities. Acetone powders of mycelium when prepared at a low temperature, showed a high activity which varied within the range of 38-82 pg. cysteine produced/hr./lOO mg. acetone powder with sulphite as the inorganic sulphur source, and 25-74 pg. cysteine produced/hr./100 mg. acetone powder with thiosulphate as the inorganic sulphur source.
Cysteine synthesis from sulphate and mlphite The mycelial acetone powders, when incubated alone in buffer, showed a small endogenous production of cysteine, possibly due to autolysis. As shown in Table 1 , there was a considerable synthesis of cysteine when pyridoxal, glutamate and pyruvate were added to this system. The omission of glutamate, or pyruvate, caused only a 5 0 % decrease of synthesis, as it was impossible to decrease significantly the amount of free internal amino acids in the mycelium by starvation. (After 6 hr, starvation approximately 80% of the original amount of glutamic acid still remained.) Other amino acids, such as alanine and aspartic acid, and a-ketoglutaric acid and oxalacetic acid were less effective in the system. With sulphate as the inorganic sulphur source, the rate of synthesis was markedly lower, but the pattern followed was identical with that found with sulphite. Acetone powder preparations of mycelium were incubated in a tots1 volume of 10 ml, at 87' for 5 hr. Cysteine and cystine were determined in the supernatant after incubation, the results being expressed as pg. cysteine formed/hr./100 mg. acetone powder. Four experiments recorded. Additions Cysteine synthesis from thiosulphate There was a considerable synthesis of cysteine with the acetone powder, buffer and thiosulphate alone; this was markedly increased by the addition of serine. The rate of synthesis was not increased by the further addition of pyridoxal and a slight inhibition was noted upon the addition of other amino acids and keto acids ( Table 2) . Cysteine sulphinic acid as an intermediate i n the synthesis The production of cysteine sulphinic acid and the utilization of glutamic acid were demonstrated with sulphite as the inorganic sulphur source. With thiosulphate as the sulphur source, formation of cysteine sulphinic acid was not observed. The results obtained by a semi-quantitative estimation of changes in free internal amino acids, other than cysteine, are shown in Table 3 . Table 3 . Formation and utilization of amino acids during cysteiw synthesis Acetone powder preparations of mycelium were incubated in a total volume of 10 ml. at 3 ' 7 ' for 5 hr. Amino acids were determined after incubation of hot water extracts of the acetone powders by the chromatographic method described in the text, the results being expressed in arbitrary units.
Additions 
Growth studies with mutant organisms The results of growth studies with various mutants, by the colony diameter method, are shown in Table 4 , Auxanographic tests gave results similar to those obtained by this method. In addition t o the various mutants mentioned in the text, forty-two other mutants were obtained, the metabolic block in all cases being between sulphate and sulphite. Mutants 1 and 7 made relatively poor growth on all media, whereas the growth of the other mutants, where it occurred, was more like that of the wild type. Studies with mutant no. 7 Mutant no. 7 was studied in greatest detail because of the interest aroused by its poor growth on thiosulphate. The results of the metabolic experiments indicate that sulphite and thiosulphate may be metabolized by different paths, and it might be expected that mutants would be found which could utilize sulphite but not thiosulphate, and vice versa. That mutant no. 7 does not utilize either sulphite or thiosulphate to any large extent may indicate that these compounds are on the same pathway, or that some type of double block in two separate pathways is present. The response of this mutant to cysteine is shown in Fig, 1 , and the quantitative response to various other sulphur compounds is shown in Fig. 2 , as measuredin spore germination tests. Table 5 illustrates ' leakiness ', i.e. some growth and germination on sulphate, but much less than that of the wild type. Such 'leakiness' may be due to a slight ability of the mutant t o convert sulphate to cysteine. Many of the 'leaky' mutants gave a negative auxanographic test for growth on sulphate, while showing some response in the spore germination tests. 

The evidence presented suggests that inorganic sulphur compounds may be synthesized biologically into cysteine via at least two different pathways in Aspergillus niduluns. The pathway proposed by Kearney & Singer (1952) for the metabolism of cysteine sulphinic acid in Prokw vulgaris and shown to be reversible in rabbit kidney by Chapeville & Fromageot (1954) suggests the pathway starting with sulphate shown in Fig. 3 . The latter part of this pathway is taken from the suggestion of Medes & Floyd (1942) that cysteine is oxidized via cysteine sulphenic acid to cysteine sulphinic acid. This would explain the experimental data obtained with the wild-type Aspergillus nidulans preparations which use sulphate and sulphite as the inorganic sulphur sources, and also the growth behaviour of mutants 1, 2, 8, 4, 6, 8 and 9. This pathway, however, provides no explanation for the metabolism of thiosulphate.
The stimulation of cysteine synthesis by serine, when thiosulphate is the inorganic sulphur source, and the complete lack of any stimulating effect of glutamic acid, keto acids or pyridoxal on this system, together with the evidence that there is no intermediate production of cysteine sulphinic acid, leads to the conclusion that thiosulphate is metabolized by an alternative pathway. The suggestion by Hockenhull (1949) that thiosulphate and serine combine to give cysteine-S-sulphonic acid, which gives rise to cysteine, would provide an alternative pathway for the metabolism of thiosulphate which would agree with the experimental data. The pathway in mutant no. 7 is not entirely clear, but a block in the production of some unknown cofactor or energy-providing system common to both pathways, or a permeability change in the mycelium, are possible explanations of the behaviour of this mutant, which is apparently blocked in both metabolic pathways simultaneously.
Reliable species identification is necessary for conservation and sustainable exploitation of natural resources. DNA sequences of highly conserved genes have been used as a tool to identify biological species. This approach became especially relevant when identification based on morphological characters is not possible (e.g. larvae, eggs and fragmented tissue). A short Given the great power of DNA barcoding to identify fish species and considering the unique assemblage of Lower Paraná River fish along with future changing scenarios, the present study aimed to group the first comprehensive reference COI sequence library for fishes of this region. Also, to test the effectiveness of the barcoding methodology for their identification in future studies.

Several fishing techniques were used for sampling. Sampling methods included gill nets, lift nets, slat traps, hoop nets and angling. Animals were handled with maximum care to prevent or minimize injuries during studies. All sampling procedures and methods were in accordance with the FishBol international project recommendations and the Guidelines for the use of fishes in research by the American Fisheries Society.
A total of 308 specimens were sampled between 2012 and 2013 from a wide area of the Lower Paraná River near the city of Rosario (50 sampling points, site 1) with the exception of 8 specimens obtained at one sampling point at site 2 (Fig 1) . The locations involved in the study were not part of any protected area, reserve forests or national parks. The General Direction of Natural Resources of the Production Ministry from Entre Rios Province in compliance with the law N°4892/70, issued the permission to conduct this study in Paraná River and Delta from Diamante to Gualeguay city. No specific permissions were required for sampling point 2 since tissue samples and photograph of Specimens were obtained from sport and commercial fishermen. The selected area encompasses a variety of environments, such as lagoons, streams, wetlands, the main river channel and its coasts. Collected specimens were anesthetized by immersion in 1% benzocaine in water and euthanized by benzocaine excess. A small piece (5-7 mm³) of muscle or fin tissue was removed from the right side of each fresh fish and preserved in 96% ethanol at -20°C. Specimens were photographed, labeled and fixed in 10% formaldehyde solution for 7 days. Occasionally, tissues were collected through the support of fisherman. Tissues and vouchers specimens were stored in 96% ethanol and deposited in the Fish Collection of the Angel Gallardo Natural Sciences Provincial Museum, Rosario, Argentina. Some tissue samples lack morphological vouchers, but have a "photographic voucher" according to the Fish-BOL collaborator's protocol [28] . All specimens for this study were obtained in compliance with animal welfare laws, local guidelines and national policy in the realm of the Argentine Republic.
Taxonomic determination was performed following the identification reliability levels 1 and 2 according to the Fish-BOL collaborator's protocol [28] . Fish identification was determined to the species level whenever possible; using the following references [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] . Fish classification follows Eschmeyer (2014) [48] .
Extraction, PCR amplification, and DNA sequencing Total genomic DNA was extracted from muscle or fin tissue from each specimen using an automated Glass Fiber protocol [49] . A 648-bp DNA sequence from the 5' region of COI [50] was subsequently amplified by PCR, with the following thermal cycling: initial denaturation at 95°C for 2 min, 35 cycles at 94°C for 30 s, 52°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 1min, with a final extension step at 72°C for 10 min. The 12.5 μl PCR reaction mixes included 6.25 μl of 10% trehalose, 2 μl of ultrapure water, 
Bidirectional sequences were assembled in SEQSCAPE version 2.1.1 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), and manually edited. Assembled DNA sequences were submitted to GenBank (accession numbers: KU288760-KU289067).
The COI assemble sequences were analyzed using Alignment Browser and Sequence Composition tools, both available in the Sequence Analysis Module of BOLD. Genetic distances among and within species were estimated using MEGA, version 6.0 [52] . The applied model of nucleotide substitution was estimated using the best fit substitution model tool [53] available in the same software. General time reversible substitution model (GTR) with a Gamma distribution of variable sites and invariable sites was the model that best fit the substitution pattern of the dataset with ti/tv = 3.48, α = 0.83, and I = 0.56.
Genetic distances among and within species were also estimated using the Kimura two-parameter (K2P) substitution model [54] , implemented in the Distance Summary tool in BOLD. This is the standard model for DNA barcoding data sets and one of the most commonly used models to describe distance between species using COI. Since no significant differences were found in estimated distances and tree topologies between GTR and K2P models, the latter was chosen for comparison purposes. Haplotype identification was performed using DnaSP 5.10.01 [55] .
Neighbour Joining (NJ) and Maximum Likelihood (ML) trees based on K2P genetic distance were created to provide a graphic representation for the patterning of distance between species using the MEGA 6 software [52] . Node robustness was inferred with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Comparisons at the species level of the maximum intraspecific genetic distance with the minimum distance to the nearest neighbour were performed applying the BOLD's 'Barcoding Gap Analysis' tool.
Three different clustering methods, Barcode Index Number (BIN) system [5] , Poisson Tree Processes (PTP) model [6] and Automatic Barcode Gap Discovery (ABGD) [7] , were used to confirm the concordance between sequence clusters and species designations by taxonomy. These methods were selected based on their general popularity and strong performance in previous studies [56, 57] . The three methods clustered COI sequence data into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) independent of prior taxonomic assignment. PTP reports were generated with default settings using the ML solution. ABGD clustering was carried out using the K2P distance model applying the following parameters: Pmin = 0.001, Pmax = 0.1; Steps 20; Nb bins = 20. We implemented a range of values for the gap width (X), between 0.1 and 1.5 to assess the consistency of inferred groups under varying gap width values.
Sequence comparisons with previously known sequences and close species were performed by BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST) and the BOLD Identification System (IDS) (www.boldsystems.org).
Diagnostic characters among sets of sequences were examined using BOLD's Diagnostic Character analysis tool. Concordance between BINs assignment and species identification by classical taxonomy was analyzed by the 'BIN Discordance Report' sequence analysis tool [5] available on BOLD. The BIN Discordance Report facilitates this check by comparing the taxonomy on selected records against all others in the BINs they are associated with. Specimens corresponding to discordant BINs were re-evaluated by a specialist in order to verify our data and correct potential misidentifications.
Taxonomic identification of the 308 fish specimens resulted in 79 species (71 Genera, 35 Families and 10 Orders) from the Lower Paraná River (Fig 2; S1 Table) . All collected species belong to the Class Actinopterygii with the exception of Potamotrygon motoro that belongs to the Class Chondrichthyes. Eight out of 71 genera (11.3%) were represented by more than one species (Astyanax, Characidium, Odontesthes, Pimelodus, Ageneiosus, Brycon, Crenicichla, and Cnesterodon). The number of individuals per species ranged from 1 to 10 (mean 4) with 33 species represented by more than 4 individuals and 16 species represented by one specimen.
Most species of commercial interest were represented in this study, such as the large migratory species Prochilodus lineatus, Salminus brasiliensis, Pseudoplatystoma corruscans, Brycon orbignyanus and Leporinus obtusidens. Recreational interest species such as P. motoro, Hoplias malabaricus, Odontesthes bonariensis, Gymnotus inaequilabiatus, Eigenmannia trilineata, and Hoplosternum littorale were also included. G. inaequilabiatus and E. trilineata are widely used as live bait for sport fishing [22] . Most species belong to the orders Siluriformes and Characiformes in agreement with previous reports for Neotropics [58, 59] . In addition, species belonging to the orders Clupeiformes (Lysengraulis grossidens, Ramnogaster melanostoma, and Pellona flavipinnis) and Atheriniformes (O. bonariensis) that migrate from estuarine or marine environments to freshwater habitats were identified. Cyprinus carpio, an exotic species, was also reported.
COI amplified DNA fragments (~648 pb) were obtained from all 308 specimens. No stop codons, insertions, or deletions were found in any of the amplified sequences, suggesting that all of them constitute functional mitochondrial COI sequences. No NUMTs (nuclear DNA sequences originating from mitochondrial DNA sequences) amplifications were detected. Average nucleotide frequencies were C (27.53%), T (29.40%), A (24.82%), and G (18.04%), similar to those previously reported in other studies [60] .
Relationships among sequences were represented by ML (Fig 3) and NJ (S1 Fig) trees. Both K2P ML and NJ trees grouped sequences of the same taxonomically identified species in no overlapping clusters, with the exception of two species of the genera Odontesthes (O. bonariensis and O. perugiae) which were present in the same COI cluster. Species clusters were supported with boostrap values of 100%. Deep intraspecific divergences were observed in the NJ and K2P ML analysis among some sequences of H. malabaricus, B. orbignyanus, P. motoro and Megalonema argentinum species (Fig 3) .
Genetic distances increased from lower to higher taxonomic levels. The average K2P genetic distance between specimens was 0.53% within species, 12.26% within genera and 19.61% within families (Table 1 ). The average K2P genetic distance within conspecific specimens was 23-fold lower than the average value found in congeneric species.
Distances between species ranged from 0.00% to 19.98% (Table 1) , considering the two species of the genus Odontesthes with a very low genetic distance value ranging from 0% to 0.62% (Table 2 ). For the other congeneric species, minimum interspecific distances ranged from 4.06% in Pimelodus genus to 19.48% in Crenicichla genus (Table 2) .
A barcode gap of 2.5% between conspecifics and congenerics K2P distances was observed for most analyzed data (Fig 4) . In 95% of species analysed the maximum intraspecific distance was 1.56%. The remaining 5% presented intraspecific distances higher than 2%: H. malabaricus (7.59%), B. orbignyanus (6.68%), P. motoro (3.32%), and M. argentinum (2.19%) (Fig 4A and  4A' ). The minimum genetic distance between species was 4.06% in 99% of species analysed. Only Odontesthes genus presented an intraspecific distance lower than 0.62% ( Fig 4B and 4B' ).
The species discrimination power of DNA barcoding was analysed by plotting the maximum intraspecific distance of each species against its minimum distance to the nearest neighbour (Fig 5) . For whole data set, with the exception of Odontesthes species sequences, genetic The K2P/ML tree of 308 COI sequences for 79 morphologically identified freshwater fish species from Lower Paraná River in Argentina. NJ tree was divided into two parts from top to bottom in order from left to right. Bootstrap values >90 for 1000 replicates are shown at each branch. The number of specimens analyzed for each species is shown between brackets. Solid triangles represent clusters of multiple specimens, with height proportional to specimen number and the horizontal width proportional to the genetic variation within each cluster. In gray are shown branches of species with high intraspecific genetic divergence and species with overlapping clusters. Columns next to the tree represent presence of recognition for each clustering method while boxes highlights the differences among methods. Specimens of Brycon orbignyanus with high genetic divergence that were re-classified as B. cf. hilarii are highlighted with "*".
distances of each species to their nearest neighbours were higher than the maximum intraspecific genetic distance, showing that COI barcode could discriminate 97% of species analysed from Lower Paraná River (Fig 5) .
For reliable COI species assignment, all data set was analyzed by three clustering methods (BIN, ABGD and PTP) in order to confirm the concordance between sequence clusters and species designations through taxonomy.
Congruent results were obtained among the three clustering methods tested in most cases. Records were assigned to 79 BINs corresponding to 79 species identified by taxonomy experts (Fig 3) . One species (Hoplosternum littorale) had no BIN, since it did not meet BOLD minimum requirements to be included in this analysis. Two species shared one same BIN (O. bonariensis and O. perugiae). New BINs for G. inaequilabiatus, P. motoro, Crenicichla vittata, Serrapinus piaba, M. argentinum, and Pachyurus bonariensis were generated. G. inaequilabiatus and P. motoro have already had records with a different BIN number. The description of new BINs for species that already had records with a different BIN number could reveal possible cryptic fish species or misidentification.
Differences between clustering methods were found in C. decemmaculatus-C. cf. raddai cluster, in which BIN and ABGD reported two groups while PTP reported only one (Fig 3) .
At least two clustering methods separated three of the four taxonomic identified species with higher intraspecific divergence into two different clusters, suggesting that these three groups deserved further investigation (H. malabaricus, B. orbignyanus, and P. motoro). In the case of M. argentinum, only one cluster was defined by the three clustering methods. Little information is available about M. argentinum biology, geographical distribution and conservation status, and no molecular data has been reported until now.
Two clusters for one taxonomic identified species. For further analyses of H. malabaricus, B. orbignyanus, and P. motoro cases, K2P-NJ trees were performed (Fig 6) using COI and Amazonas River (AMAZ, [61] ). NJ tree was rooted using an H. intermedius sequence from BSB-BOLD project. Results showed that the six sequences that grouped together in the general tree (Fig 3 and Fig 6I-a cluster A) clustered with sequences of H. malabaricus from Salado River basin (Fig 6I-b) . This cluster presented a maximum divergence of 0.3% and conformed only one BIN (BOLD:AAZ3734). The sequence in a separated branch at the main tree (Fig 3  and Fig 6I-a cluster B) , clustered with H. malabaricus sequences from Upper Parana River and Amazonas River basins with a maximum divergence of 0.5%, conforming another BIN (BOLD: AAB1732) (Fig 6I-b) . In addition, this sequence belonged to a specimen with different phenotypic characteristics easily recognized by fishermen (H. malabaricus of "small head", Fig 6I-a,  photographs) . For sampling areas covered in this work only H. malabaricus has been cited. Our results showed that deep genetic divergence for H. malabaricus also occurred in a smaller geographic scale since all individuals were sampled in the same area. Genetic and/or morphological-morphometric studies have not been reported yet for H. malabaricus from Lower Paraná River. Therefore, information obtained in this work would provide the kickoff for future research on this species complex.
The Brycon genus case. Only published sequences (n = 33) of six South American species were used: B. orbignyanus from Upper Paraná River (BOLD project code FUPR), Brycon melanopterus from Amazonas River and Brycon orthotaenia, Brycon opalinus, Brycon insignis and Brycon nattereri from Sao Francisco River (BOLD project code BSB). Comparative NJ sub-tree showed that seven COI sequences of B. orbignyanus specimens that grouped together in the general tree (Fig 3 and Fig 6II-a-cluster A) clustered with B. orbignyanus sequences from Upper Paraná River (Fig 6II-b) . This group presented a mean K2P distance of 0.07% and a maximum distance of 0.16%, and belonged to the same BIN (BOLD:AAE8065). Interestingly, the other two specimens that conformed cluster B at the NJ tree in Fig 6II-a, conformed a cohesive separate cluster with a different BIN number (BOLD:AAE0479) (Fig 6II-b) . In order to determine species-specific status, both sequences were compared by BLAST against the NCBI nr database and by IDS tool against BOLD database. Both sequences displayed a 99% identity with B. hilarii sequences and over 99.6% of similarity by IDS tool, showing that the vouchers might be misidentified. Only photographic vouchers were available for these two individuals, which were revised and compared with all B. orbignyanus photographic vouchers. Taking into account sequence comparison results and differences found between photographic vouchers, both BOLD records were re classified as Brycon cf. hilarii in BOLD database and in NJ tree (Fig  3) . Although B. hilarii distribution corresponds to Paraguay River Basin [62] , our result showed that B. hilarii could reach the Paraná River near the mouth of the Paraguay River (Fig  1, sampling site 2 ). However, a higher sampling effort is necessary to confirm this observation.
The P. motoro case. Two clusters were observed at the main tree with deep intraspecific divergences between them (Fig 3 and Fig 6III-a) . One cluster (A) grouped three sequences (BIN BOLD:ACG6814) while the other one (B), included only one sequence (BIN BOLD: AAB5375). Comparison analysis of COI sequences was performed using sequences of three different species from Upper Paraná River (P. motoro and Potamotrygon falkneri of BOLD project code FUPR, and Potamotrygon hystrix [63] ). Comparison analysis (Fig 6III-b) revealed that the sequence at cluster B grouped with P. motoro and P. falkneri sequences from the Upper Paraná River conforming a single BIN (BOLD:AAB5375). The other three P. motoro sequences (cluster A) were displayed in a separated branch, without genetic divergence among them, and constituted a new exclusive BIN (BOLD:ACG6814). Interestingly, the three P. motoro sequences in cluster A did not cluster to any other known species of the genus with reported COI sequences. A possible explanation for this result could be the presence of a new species that share some morphological characters and pattern coloration with P. motoro, which has led to misidentification. Vouchers revision was not possible in this case since only photographic vouchers were available for these individuals. More than one species for one cluster: Species with interspecific genetic divergence values in the same range than intraspecific genetic divergence values: O. perugiae and O. bonariensis. COI interspecific genetic K2P distance between O. perugiae and O. bonariensis was in the same range as intraspecific distances recorded for O. bonariensis. BOLD's Diagnostic Character analysis showed that there was not any exclusive nucleotide for species. Six haplotypes were observed among O. perugiae and O. bonariensis sequences, two of them were shared between specimens from both species (data not shown). Moreover, COI haplotypes were shared also with other Odontesthes species, such as O. argentinensis and O. mirinensis (Villanova GV not published results).
Barcode Index Numbers (BINs) and taxonomic concordance. To check the correlation degree between species designations by taxonomy and assigned BINs, all sequences were analyzed by the 'BIN Discordance Report' tool available within the "Sequence Analysis" module of BOLD. As a result 79 BINS were identified from 291 records that met the minimum requirements to be included in the analysis. Taxonomic concordance was found in 113 records of 27 BINs (34.2%), 1 record (Xyliphius sp.) was singleton (BINs with single specimens) (1.2%) and 177 records of 51 BINs (64.6%) were conflictive, indicating that at least two different taxonomic assignments were found in BOLD database within a single BIN.
Among the 51 discordant BINS, 6 were at the Family level (17 conflicting records), 16 at the Genus level (60 conflicting records) and 29 at the species level (100 conflicting records). After an exhaustive revision by two independent groups of fish taxonomists, who worked with identification reliability level 2 according to the Fish-BOL collaborator's protocol [28] , the 17 conflicting records at the Family level as well as the 60 records at the Genus level were resolved. In most of these cases, the discordant entries were caused by misidentifications in previous BOLD data projects. Out of 29 discordant BINS at the species level, 15 were shown to exhibit 'no true' : values obtained using individuals grouped in the same BIN *: the discordance was probably caused by misidentifications **: the discordance was probably caused by COI lower species-specific power of discrimination ***: the discordance COI sequences were not published or available in public BOLD projects ****: the discordance was probably caused by a combination of tree previous cases.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0157419.t003
discordances, as the discordant BINS were caused by lack of taxonomic determination at species level in previous BOLD projects (S2 Table) such as species identified as sp. or cf. (e.g. Potamotrygon sp., Pimelodella cf. cristata, etc.). There were 28 conflicting taxa within the 14 "true" discordant BINS. Among these conflicting taxa common characteristics were found and records were classified in four groups in order to explain the discordance among records within a BIN (Table 3) : Group I ( Ã ): the discordance was probably caused by misidentifications,; Group II ( ÃÃ ): the discordance was probably caused by COI lower species-specific power of discrimination; Group III ( ÃÃÃ ): the discordance could not be analyzed comparing involved records since COI sequences were not available in public BOLD projects. BIN discordance analysis in BOLD is performed using all record uploaded to BOLD database. However a high proportion of these records belonged to projects that are not public and sequences were not available to be used. Group IV ( ÃÃÃÃ ): the discordance was probably caused by a combination of tree previous cases. For each conflicting sequence data, the maximum intraspecific distance and nearest neighbour distance were calculated and geographic distribution of specimens and references were added when available (Table 3) .

The present study represents the first molecular survey of Lower Paraná River fish diversity corresponding to the Southernmost Neotropical region. Seventy nine (43%) of the 185 fish species described for the Lower Paraná River were assessed in this work using COI barcodes from a subarea of this river. The observed COI genetic distances between conspecifics and congenerics (means: 0.53% and 12.26% respectively) for Lower Paraná River fish were within the range of previously reported values from fishes of freshwater ecosystems [8, 10, 27, 70] . All sequences of the same species formed high bootstrap-supported clusters without any overlap between species, even in species within the same genera, with the exception of Odontesthes species. Nine new records not previously studied by COI barcodes were generated and incorporated to the BOLD data system (C. cf. raddai, Schizodon platae Ã , Otocinclus arnoldi, Parastegophilus maculatus Ã , Pseudohemiodon laticeps, M. argentinum Ã , Auchenipterus nigripinnis, B. cf. hilarii and Xyliphius sp.), three of which are endemic species of Argentina ( Ã ). Our study included species that migrate from estuarine or marine environments to freshwater habitats. Reproductive activity was reported for some of them in the Lower Paraná River (e.g. L. grossidens [71] ). In this regards, COI barcode reference library will contribute to future freshwater ichthyoplankton identification and life cycle monitoring.
Molecular data provide a valuable resource for preliminary species delimitations or validating traditional phenotype-based species circumscriptions [7, 72] . In our study, all data set was analyzed by three clustering methods and numerous experts in order to confirm the concordance between sequence clusters and species designations by taxonomy. Analysis of the results obtained by distinct clustering methods offer an additional level of confidence in the inferred OTUs in Lower Paraná River fish. Two species (H. malabaricus and P. motoro) displayed a deep intra-specific genetic distance (>2%) and the corresponding sequences grouped into two different clusters in each one. The genus Hoplias is distributed throughout many hydrographic systems of South America and has 11 recognized species. At least 3 of them are present in Argentina [73, 74] . Only H. malabaricus was described in the Lower Parana River. H. malabaricus is considered by many authors as a complex of cryptic species that require a profound taxonomic revision [61, 75] . Based on COI sequence analysis, a strong geographic structure for H. malabaricus from distant hydrographic basins in South America was previously proposed [27] . However, specimens obtained in this study from the same Paraná River area also present high COI divergence supporting the hypothesis of the existence of a cryptic species in the Lower Paraná River.
At least six freshwater stingrays species of the genera Potamotrygon are present in the Lower Parana River (P. schuhmacheri, P. hystrix, P amandae, P. brachyura, P. falknerii, and P. motoro). Recently, a new Potamotrygon sp. was described by Almirón et al. [18] , in the Paraná Delta area, which could not be assigned to previously described species. Among them, P. motoro is the most widely distributed species of the family Potamotrygonidae, present in most freshwater systems in South America [63, 76, 77] . The widespread distribution of the genera Potamotrygon, together with significant variation in some morphological characters (e.g., dorsal disc coloration) among populations of different basins, and even in closely adjacent areas, has led some authors to indicate that a taxonomic subdivision of P. motoro may be necessary [77, 78] . In the case of Lower Paraná River stingrays, only COI sequences for P. motoro are available. Although low intra and interspecific variation have been reported among Potamotrygonidae family members in the Upper Paraná River basin [10, 79, 80] , our results showed a high COI divergence between P. motoro specimens. This scenario claims a more extensive and profound taxonomic revision along with DNA sequences analysis for Potamotrygon genera that inhabits the Lower Parana River.
Results obtained in this work, and previous reports [10, 11, 22] state the existence of hidden diversity in many species and suggest that Neotropical species richness is still underestimated.
The success of using barcoding for species identification strongly depends on the presence of high-quality reference sequences available in public sequence libraries and the existence of specimen vouchers correctly identified. DNA barcode databases such as BOLD, have implemented minimal quality criteria for barcode data acquisition and generation [24] . However, reference specimen misidentification appears to be the single largest factor contributing to errors in the FISH-BOL data set [81] . Barcoding methodology and a careful examination of specimens allowed us to resolve apparent outliers and cluster conflicts in the FISH-BOL data set. This situation also highlights the importance of checking the taxonomic identity in the light of COI information previous to its upload in public sequence databases. This was the case for Brycon cf. hilarii, previously characterized as B. Orbignyanus, as well as for several detected BIN discordances based in misidentification. In these cases, the analyses of COI sequences correctly separates species pairs obtained in previous barcode studies on these species (e.g. Ageneiosus inermis vs. Ageneiosus ucayalensis [64] ). COI sequence comparisons was not able to discriminate between two species of the genera Odontesthes (O. bonariensis and O. perugie). Moreover, shared haplotypes between specimens of both species were found (data not shown). This result is consistent with a recent radiation process in the genera Odontesthes as proposed by Garcia et al. (2014) [67] and Campanella et al. (2015) [82] , and states that COI information could be used only for genera identification.
The current COI reference library provides highly reliable DNA and vouchers exemplars for 97.5% of the fish species investigated and it can be confidently used as a benchmark for identification of almost 50% of Lower Parana River fish species. This COI barcode library will be especially important for fish biodiversity monitoring, for sustainable exploitation of fishing resources, for reproductive biology studies and ecological monitoring, among other applications.
Supporting Information 
The concept of "big data" is not new; however the way it is defined is constantly changing. Various attempts at defining big data essentially characterize it as a collection of data elements whose size, speed, type, and/or complexity require one to seek, adopt, and invent new hardware and software mechanisms in order to successfully store, analyze, and visualize the data [1] [2] [3] . Healthcare is a prime example of how the three Vs of data, velocity (speed of generation of data), variety, and volume [4] , are an innate aspect of the data it produces. This data is spread among multiple healthcare systems, health insurers, researchers, government entities, and so forth. Furthermore, each of these data repositories is siloed and inherently incapable of providing a platform for global data transparency. To add to the three Vs, the veracity of healthcare data is also critical for its meaningful use towards developing translational research.
Despite the inherent complexities of healthcare data, there is potential and benefit in developing and implementing big data solutions within this realm. A report by McKinsey Global Institute suggests that if US healthcare were to use big data creatively and effectively, the sector could create more than $300 billion in value every year. Two-thirds of the value would be in the form of reducing US healthcare expenditure [5] . Historical approaches to medical research have generally focused on the investigation of disease states based on the changes in physiology in the form of a confined view of certain singular modality of data [6] . Although this approach to understanding diseases is essential, research at this level mutes the variation and interconnectedness that define the true underlying medical mechanisms [7] . After decades of technological laggard, the field of medicine has begun to acclimatize to today's digital data age. New technologies make it possible to capture vast amounts of information about each individual patient over a large timescale. However, despite the advent of medical electronics, the data captured and gathered from these patients has remained vastly underutilized and thus wasted.
Important physiological and pathophysiological phenomena are concurrently manifest as changes across multiple clinical streams. This results from strong coupling among different systems within the body (e.g., interactions between heart rate, respiration, and blood pressure) thereby producing potential markers for clinical assessment. Thus, understanding and predicting diseases require an aggregated approach where structured and unstructured data stemming from a myriad of clinical and nonclinical modalities are utilized for a more comprehensive perspective of the disease states. An aspect of healthcare research that has recently gained traction is in addressing some of the growing pains in introducing concepts of big data analytics to medicine. Researchers are studying the complex nature of healthcare data in terms of both characteristics of the data itself and the taxonomy of analytics that can be meaningfully performed on them.
In this paper, three areas of big data analytics in medicine are discussed. These three areas do not comprehensively reflect the application of big data analytics in medicine; instead they are intended to provide a perspective of broad, popular areas of research where the concepts of big data analytics are currently being applied.
Image Processing. Medical images are an important source of data frequently used for diagnosis, therapy assessment and planning [8] . Computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), X-ray, molecular imaging, ultrasound, photoacoustic imaging, fluoroscopy, positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT), and mammography are some of the examples of imaging techniques that are well established within clinical settings. Medical image data can range anywhere from a few megabytes for a single study (e.g., histology images) to hundreds of megabytes per study (e.g., thin-slice CT studies comprising upto 2500+ scans per study [9] ). Such data requires large storage capacities if stored for long term. It also demands fast and accurate algorithms if any decision assisting automation were to be performed using the data. In addition, if other sources of data acquired for each patient are also utilized during the diagnoses, prognosis, and treatment processes, then the problem of providing cohesive storage and developing efficient methods capable of encapsulating the broad range of data becomes a challenge.
Signal Processing. Similar to medical images, medical signals also pose volume and velocity obstacles especially during continuous, high-resolution acquisition and storage from a multitude of monitors connected to each patient. However, in addition to the data size issues, physiological signals also pose complexity of a spatiotemporal nature. Analysis of physiological signals is often more meaningful when presented along with situational context awareness which needs to be embedded into the development of continuous monitoring and predictive systems to ensure its effectiveness and robustness.
Currently healthcare systems use numerous disparate and continuous monitoring devices that utilize singular physiological waveform data or discretized vital information to provide alert mechanisms in case of overt events. However, such uncompounded approaches towards development and implementation of alarm systems tend to be unreliable and their sheer numbers could cause "alarm fatigue" for both care givers and patients [10] [11] [12] . In this setting, the ability to discover new medical knowledge is constrained by prior knowledge that has typically fallen short of maximally utilizing high-dimensional time series data. The reason that these alarm mechanisms tend to fail is primarily because these systems tend to rely on single sources of information while lacking context of the patients' true physiological conditions from a broader and more comprehensive viewpoint. Therefore, there is a need to develop improved and more comprehensive approaches towards studying interactions and correlations among multimodal clinical time series data. This is important because studies continue to show that humans are poor in reasoning about changes affecting more than two signals [13] [14] [15] .
Genomics. The cost to sequence the human genome (encompassing 30,000 to 35,000 genes) is rapidly decreasing with the development of high-throughput sequencing technology [16, 17] . With implications for current public health policies and delivery of care [18, 19] , analyzing genome-scale data for developing actionable recommendations in a timely manner is a significant challenge to the field of computational biology. Cost and time to deliver recommendations are crucial in a clinical setting. Initiatives tackling this complex problem include tracking of 100,000 subjects over 20 to 30 years using the predictive, preventive, participatory, and personalized health, refered to as P4, medicine paradigm [20] [21] [22] as well as an integrative personal omics profile [23] . The P4 initiative is using a system approach for (i) analyzing genome-scale datasets to determine disease states, (ii) moving towards blood based diagnostic tools for continuous monitoring of a subject, (iii) exploring new approaches to drug target discovery, developing tools to deal with big data challenges of capturing, validating, storing, mining, integrating, and finally (iv) modeling data for each individual. The integrative personal omics profile (iPOP) combines physiological monitoring and multiple high-throughput methods for genome sequencing to generate a detailed health and disease states of a subject [23] . Ultimately, realizing actionable recommendations at the clinical level remains a grand challenge for this field [24, 25] . Utilizing such high density data for exploration, discovery, and clinical translation demands novel big data approaches and analytics.
Despite the enormous expenditure consumed by the current healthcare systems, clinical outcomes remain suboptimal, particularly in the USA, where 96 people per 100,000 die annually from conditions considered treatable [26] . A key factor attributed to such inefficiencies is the inability to effectively gather, share, and use information in a more comprehensive manner within the healthcare systems [27] . This is an opportunity for big data analytics to play a more significant role in aiding the exploration and discovery process, improving the delivery of care, helping to design and plan healthcare policy, providing a means for comprehensively measuring, and evaluating the complicated and convoluted healthcare data. More importantly, adoption of insights gained from big data analytics has the potential to save lives, improve care delivery, expand access to healthcare, align payment with performance, and help curb the vexing growth of healthcare costs.
Medical imaging provides important information on anatomy and organ function in addition to detecting diseases states. Moreover, it is utilized for organ delineation, identifying tumors in lungs, spinal deformity diagnosis, artery stenosis detection, aneurysm detection, and so forth. In these applications, image processing techniques such as enhancement, segmentation, and denoising in addition to machine learning methods are employed. As the size and dimensionality of data increase, understanding the dependencies among the data and designing efficient, accurate, and computationally effective methods demand new computer-aided techniques and platforms. The rapid growth in the number of healthcare organizations as well as the number of patients has resulted in the greater use of computer-aided medical diagnostics and decision support systems in clinical settings. Many areas in health care such as diagnosis, prognosis, and screening can be improved by utilizing computational intelligence [28] .
The integration of computer analysis with appropriate care has potential to help clinicians improve diagnostic accuracy [29] . The integration of medical images with other types of electronic health record (EHR) data and genomic data can also improve the accuracy and reduce the time taken for a diagnosis.
In the following, data produced by imaging techniques are reviewed and applications of medical imaging from a big data point of view are discussed.
Medical imaging encompasses a wide spectrum of different image acquisition methodologies typically utilized for a variety of clinical applications. For example, visualizing blood vessel structure can be performed using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), ultrasound, and photoacoustic imaging [30] . From a data dimension point of view, medical images might have 2, 3, and four dimensions. Positron emission tomography (PET), CT, 3D ultrasound, and functional MRI (fMRI) are considered as multidimensional medical data. Modern medical image technologies can produce highresolution images such as respiration-correlated or "fourdimensional" computed tomography (4D CT) [31] . Higher resolution and dimensions of these images generate large volumes of data requiring high performance computing (HPC) and advanced analytical methods. For instance, microscopic scans of a human brain with high resolution can require 66TB of storage space [32] . Although the volume and variety of medical data make its analysis a big challenge, advances in medical imaging could make individualized care more practical [33] and provide quantitative information in variety of applications such as disease stratification, predictive modeling, and decision making systems. In the following we refer to two medical imaging techniques and one of their associated challenges.
Molecular imaging is a noninvasive technique of cellular and subcellular events [34] which has the potential for clinical diagnosis of disease states such as cancer. However, in order to make it clinically applicable for patients, the interaction of radiology, nuclear medicine, and biology is crucial [35] that could complicate its automated analysis.
Microwave imaging is an emerging methodology that could create a map of electromagnetic wave scattering arising from the contrast in the dielectric properties of different tissues [36] . It has both functional and physiological information encoded in the dielectric properties which can help differentiate and characterize different tissues and/or pathologies [37] . However, microwaves have scattering behavior that makes retrieval of information a challenging task.
The integration of images from different modalities and/or other clinical and physiological information could improve the accuracy of diagnosis and outcome prediction of disease. Liebeskind and Feldmann explored advances in neurovascular imaging and the role of multimodal CT or MRI including angiography and perfusion imaging on evaluating the brain vascular disorder and achieving precision medicine [33] . Delayed enhanced MRI has been used for exact assessment of myocardial infarction scar [38] . For this kind of disease, electroanatomic mapping (EAM) can help in identifying the subendocardial extension of infarct. The role of evaluating both MRI and CT images to increase the accuracy of diagnosis in detecting the presence of erosions and osteophytes in the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) has been investigated by Hussain et al. [39] . According to this study simultaneous evaluation of all the available imaging techniques is an unmet need.
Advanced Multimodal Image-Guided Operating (AMIGO) suite has been designed which has angiographic X-ray system, MRI, 3D ultrasound, and PET/CT imaging in the operating room (OR). This system has been used for cancer therapy and showed the improvement in localization and targeting an individual's diseased tissue [40] .
Besides the huge space required for storing all the data and their analysis, finding the map and dependencies among different data types are challenges for which there is no optimal solution yet.
The volume of medical images is growing exponentially. For instance, ImageCLEF medical image dataset contained around 66,000 images between 2005 and 2007 while just in the year of 2013 around 300,000 images were stored everyday [41] . In addition to the growing volume of images, they differ in modality, resolution, dimension, and quality which introduce new challenges such as data integration and mining specially if multiple datasets are involved. Compared to the volume of research that exists on single modal medical image analysis, there is considerably lesser number of research initiatives on multimodal image analysis.
When utilizing data at a local/institutional level, an important aspect of a research project is on how the developed system is evaluated and validated. Having annotated data or a structured method to annotate new data is a real challenge. This becomes even more challenging when large-scale data integration from multiple institutions are taken into account. As an example, for the same applications (e.g., traumatic brain injury) and the same modality (e.g., CT), different institutes might use different settings in image acquisitions which makes it hard to develop unified annotation or analytical methods for such data. In order to benefit the multimodal images and their integration with other medical data, new analytical methods with real-time feasibility and scalability are required. In the following we look at analytical methods that deal with some aspects of big data.
The goal of medical image analytics is to improve the interpretability of depicted contents [8] . Many methods and frameworks have been developed for medical image processing. However, these methods are not necessarily applicable for big data applications.
One of the frameworks developed for analyzing and transformation of very large datasets is Hadoop that employs MapReduce [42, 43] . MapReduce is a programming paradigm that provides scalability across many servers in a Hadoop cluster with a broad variety of real-world applications [44] [45] [46] . However, it does not perform well with inputoutput intensive tasks [47] . MapReduce framework has been used in [47] to increase the speed of three large-scale medical image processing use-cases, (i) finding optimal parameters for lung texture classification by employing a well-known machine learning method, support vector machines (SVM), (ii) content-based medical image indexing, and (iii) wavelet analysis for solid texture classification. In this framework, a cluster of heterogeneous computing nodes with a maximum of 42 concurrent map tasks was set up and the speedup around 100 was achieved. In other words, total execution time for finding optimal SVM parameters was reduced from about 1000 h to around 10 h. Designing a fast method is crucial in some applications such as trauma assessment in critical care where the end goal is to utilize such imaging techniques and their analysis within what is considered as a goldenhour of care [48] . Therefore, execution time or real-time feasibility of developed methods is of importance. Accuracy is another factor that should be considered in designing an analytical method. Finding dependencies among different types of data could help improve the accuracy. For instance, a hybrid machine learning method has been developed in [49] that classifies schizophrenia patients and healthy controls using fMRI images and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data [49] . The authors reported an accuracy of 87% classification, which would not have been as high if they had used just fMRI images or SNP alone. del Toro and Muller have compared some organ segmentation methods when data is considered as big data. They have proposed a method that incorporates both local contrast of the image and atlas probabilistic information [50] . An average of 33% improvement has been achieved compared to using only atlas information. Tsymbal et al. have designed a clinical decision support system that exploits discriminative distance learning with significantly lower computational complexity compared to classical alternatives and hence this system is more scalable to retrieval [51] . A computer-aided decision support system was developed by Chen et al. [52] that could assist physicians to provide accurate treatment planning for patients suffering from traumatic brain injury (TBI). In this method, patient's demographic information, medical records, and features extracted from CT scans were combined to predict the level of intracranial pressure (ICP). The accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity were reported to be around 70.3%, 65.2%, and 73.7%, respectively. In [53] , molecular imaging and its impact on cancer detection and cancer drug improvement are discussed. The proposed technology is designed to aid in early detection of cancer by integrating molecular and physiological information with anatomical information. Using this imaging technique for patients with advanced ovarian cancer, the accuracy of the predictor of response to a special treatment has been increased compared to other clinical or histopathologic criteria. A hybrid digital-optical correlator (HDOC) has been designed to speed up the correlation of images [54] . HDOC can be employed to compare images in the absence of coordinate matching or georegistration. In this multichannel method, the computation is performed in the storage medium which is a volume holographic memory which could help HDOC to be applicable in the area of big data analytics [54] .
In addition to developing analytical methods, efforts have been made for collecting, compressing, sharing, and anonymizing medical data. One example is iDASH (integrating data for analysis, anonymization, and sharing) which is a center for biomedical computing [55] . It focuses on algorithms and tools for sharing data in a privacy-preserving manner. The goal of iDASH is to bring together a multi-institutional team of quantitative scientists to develop algorithms and tools, services, and a biomedical cyber infrastructure to be used by biomedical and behavioral researchers [55] . Another example of a similar approach is Health-e-Child consortium of 14 academic, industry, and clinical partners with the aim of developing an integrated healthcare platform for European paediatrics [51] .
Based on the Hadoop platform, a system has been designed for exchanging, storing, and sharing electronic medical records (EMR) among different healthcare systems [56] . This system can also help users retrieve medical images from a database. Medical data has been investigated from an acquisition point of view where patients' vital data is collected through a network of sensors [57] . This system delivers data to a cloud for storage, distribution, and processing. A prototype system has been implemented in [58] to handle standard store/query/retrieve requests on a database of Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) images. This system uses Microsoft Windows Azure as a cloud computing platform.
When dealing with a very large volume of data, compression techniques can help overcome data storage and network bandwidth limitations. Many methods have been developed for medical image compression. However, there are a few methods developed for big data compression. A method has been designed to compress both high-throughput sequencing dataset and the data generated from calculation of log-odds of probability error for each nucleotide and the maximum compression ratios of 400 and 5 have been achieved, respectively [55] . This dataset has medical and biomedical data including genotyping, gene expression, proteomic measurements with Medical images suffer from different types of noise/artifacts and missing data. Noise reduction, artifact removal, missing data handling, contrast adjusting, and so forth could enhance the quality of images and increase the performance of processing methods. Employing multimodal data could be beneficial for this purpose [63] [64] [65] .
Compression Reducing the volume of data while maintaining important data such as anatomically relevant data [55, 61, 66] . Parallelization/real-time realization
Developing scalable/parallel methods and frameworks to speed up the analysis/processing [61] .
Registration/mapping Aligning consecutive slices/frames from one scan or corresponding images from different modalities [67, 68] .
Sharing/security/anonymization Integrity, privacy, and confidentiality of data must be protected [55, [69] [70] [71] .
Delineation of anatomical structure such as vessels and bones [50, 68, 72] .
Finding dependencies/patterns among multimodal data and/or the data captured at different time points in order to increase the accuracy of diagnosis, prediction, and overall performance of the system [47, 49, 52, 73] .
Assessing the performance or accuracy of the system/method. Validation can be objective or subjective. For the former, annotated data is usually required [74] [75] [76] .
demographics, laboratory values, images, therapeutic interventions, and clinical phenotypes for Kawasaki Disease (KD). By illustrating the data with a graph model, a framework for analyzing large-scale data has been presented [59] . For this model, the fundamental signal processing techniques such as filtering and Fourier transform were implemented. In [60] , the application of simplicity and power (SP) theory of intelligence in big data has been investigated. The goal of SP theory is to simplify and integrate concepts from multiple fields such as artificial intelligence, mainstream computing, mathematics, and human perception and cognition that can be observed as a brain-like system [60] . The proposed SP system performs lossless compression through the matching and unification of patterns. However, this system is still in the design stage and cannot be supported by today's technologies. There are some limitations in implementing the application-specific compression methods on both generalpurpose processors and parallel processors such as graphics processing units (GPUs) as these algorithms need highly variable control and complex bit manipulations which are not well suited to GPUs and pipeline architectures. To overcome this limitation, an FPGA implementation was proposed for LZ-factorization which decreases the computational burden of the compression algorithm [61] . A lossy image compression has been introduced in [62] that reshapes the image in such a way that if the image is uniformly sampled, sharp features have a higher sampling density than the coarse ones. This method is claimed to be applicable for big data compression. However, for medical applications lossy methods are not applicable in most cases as fidelity is important and information must be preserved.
These techniques are among a few techniques that have been either designed as prototypes or developed with limited applications. Developing methods for processing/analyzing a broad range and large volume of data with acceptable accuracy and speed is still critical. In Table 1 , we summarize the challenges facing medical image processing. When dealing with big data, these challenges seemed to be more serious and on the other hand analytical methods could benefit the big data to handle them.
Telemetry and physiological signal monitoring devices are ubiquitous. However, continuous data generated from these monitors have not been typically stored for more than a brief period of time, thereby neglecting extensive investigation into generated data. However, in the recent past, there has been an increase in the attempts towards utilizing telemetry and continuous physiological time series monitoring to improve patient care and management [77] [78] [79] [80] .
Streaming data analytics in healthcare can be defined as a systematic use of continuous waveform (signal varying against time) and related medical record information developed through applied analytical disciplines (e.g., statistical, quantitative, contextual, cognitive, and predictive) to drive decision making for patient care. The analytics workflow of real-time streaming waveforms in clinical settings can be broadly described using Figure 1 . Firstly, a platform for streaming data acquisition and ingestion is required which has the bandwidth to handle multiple waveforms at different fidelities. Integrating these dynamic waveform data with static data from the EHR is a key component to provide situational and contextual awareness for the analytics engine. Enriching the data consumed by analytics not only makes the system more robust, but also helps balance the sensitivity and specificity of the predictive analytics. The specifics of the signal processing will largely depend on the type of disease cohort under investigation. A variety of signal processing mechanisms can be utilized to extract a multitude of target features which are then consumed by a pretrained machine learning model to produce an actionable insight. These actionable insights could either be diagnostic, predictive, or prescriptive. These insights could further be designed to trigger other mechanisms such as alarms and notification to physicians.
Harmonizing such continuous waveform data with discrete data from other sources for finding necessary patient information and conducting research towards development of next generation diagnoses and treatments can be a daunting task [81] . For bed-side implementation of such systems in clinical environments, there are several technical considerations and requirements that need to be designed and implemented at system, analytic, and clinical levels. The following subsections provide an overview of different challenges and existing approaches in the development of monitoring systems that consume both high fidelity waveform data and discrete data from noncontinuous sources.
Historically streaming data from continuous physiological signal acquisition devices was rarely stored. Even if the option to store this data were available, the length of these data captures was typically short and downloaded only using proprietary software and data formats provided by the device manufacturers. Although most major medical device manufactures are now taking steps to provide interfaces to access live streaming data from their devices, such data in motion very quickly poses archetypal big data challenges. The fact that there are also governance challenges such as lack of data protocols, lack of data standards, and data privacy issues is adding to this. On the other side there are many challenges within the healthcare systems such as network bandwidth, scalability, and cost that have stalled the widespread adoption of such streaming data collection [82] [83] [84] . This has allowed way for system-wide projects which especially cater to medical research communities [77, 79, 80, [85] [86] [87] [88] [89] [90] [91] [92] [93] .
Research community has interest in consuming data captured from live monitors for developing continuous monitoring technologies [94, 95] . There have been several indigenous and off-the-shelf efforts in developing and implementing systems that enable such data capture [85, [96] [97] [98] [99] . There are also products being developed in the industry that facilitate device manufacturer agnostic data acquisition from patient monitors across healthcare systems.
With large volumes of streaming data and other patient information that can be gathered from clinical settings, sophisticated storage mechanisms of such data are imperative. Since storing and retrieving can be computational and time expensive, it is key to have a storage infrastructure that facilitates rapid data pull and commits based on analytic demands.
With its capability to store and compute large volumes of data, usage of systems such as Hadoop, MapReduce, and MongoDB [100, 101] is becoming much more common with the healthcare research communities. MongoDB is a free cross-platform document-oriented database which eschews traditional table-based relational database. Typically each health system has its own custom relational database schemas and data models which inhibit interoperability of healthcare data for multi-institutional data sharing or research studies. Furthermore, given the nature of traditional databases integrating data of different types such as streaming waveforms and static EHR data is not feasible. This is where MongoDB and other document-based databases can provide high performance, high availability, and easy scalability for the healthcare data needs [102, 103] . Apache Hadoop is an open source framework that allows for the distributed processing of large datasets across clusters of computers using simple programming models. It is a highly scalable platform which provides a variety of computing modules such as MapReduce and Spark. For performing analytics on continuous telemetry waveforms, a module like Spark is especially useful since it provides capabilities to ingest and compute on streaming data along with machine learning and graphing tools. Such technologies allow researchers to utilize data for both realtime as well as retrospective analysis, with the end goal to translate scientific discovery into applications for clinical settings in an effective manner.
Integration of disparate sources of data, developing consistency within the data, standardization of data from similar sources, and improving the confidence in the data especially towards utilizing automated analytics are among challenges facing data aggregation in healthcare systems [104] . Medical data can be complex in nature as well as being interconnected and interdependent; hence simplification of this complexity is important. Medical data is also subject to the highest level of scrutiny for privacy and provenance from governing bodies, therefore developing secure storage, access, and use of the data is very important [105] .
Analysis of continuous data heavily utilizes the information in time domain. However, static data does not always provide true time context and, hence, when combining the waveform data with static electronic health record data, the temporal nature of the time context during integration can also add significantly to the challenges. There are considerable efforts in compiling waveforms and other associated electronic medical information into one cohesive database that are made publicly available for researchers worldwide [106, 107] . For example, MIMIC II [108, 109] and some other datasets included in Physionet [96] provide waveforms and other clinical data from a wide variety of actual patient cohorts.
Research in signal processing for developing big data based clinical decision support systems (CDSSs) is getting more prevalent [110] . In fact organizations such as the Institution of Medicine have long advocated use of health information technology including CDSS to improve care quality [111] . CDSSs provide medical practitioners with knowledge and patient-specific information, intelligently filtered and presented at appropriate times, to improve the delivery of care [112] .
A vast amount of data in short periods of time is produced in intensive care units (ICU) where a large volume of physiological data is acquired from each patient. Hence, the potential for developing CDSS in an ICU environment has been recognized by many researchers. A scalable infrastructure for developing a patient care management system has been proposed which combines static data and stream data monitored from critically ill patients in the ICU for data mining and alerting medical staff of critical events in real time [113] . Similarly, Bressan et al. developed an architecture specialized for a neonatal ICU which utilized streaming data from infusion pumps, EEG monitors, cerebral oxygenation monitors, and so forth to provide clinical decision support [114] . A clinical trial is currently underway which extracts biomarkers through signal processing from heart and respiratory waveforms in real time to test whether maintaining stable heart rate and respiratory rate variability throughout the spontaneous breathing trials, administered to patients before extubation, may predict subsequent successful extubation [115] . An animal study shows how acquisition of noninvasive continuous data such as tissue oxygenation, fluid content, and blood flow can be used as indicators of soft tissue healing in wound care [78] . Electrocardiogrpah parameters from telemetry along with demographic information including medical history, ejection fraction, laboratory values, and medications have been used to develop an inhospital early detection system for cardiac arrest [116] .
A study presented by Lee and Mark uses the MIMIC II database to prompt therapeutic intervention to hypotensive episodes using cardiac and blood pressure time series data [117] . Another study shows the use of physiological waveform data along with clinical data from the MIMIC II database for finding similarities among patients within the selected cohorts [118] . This similarity can potentially help care givers in the decision making process while utilizing outcomes and treatments knowledge gathered from similar disease cases from the past. A combination of multiple waveform information available in the MIMIC II database is utilized to develop early detection of cardiovascular instability in patients [119] . Many types of physiological data captured in the operative and preoperative care settings and how analytics can consume these data to help continuously monitor the status of the patients during, before and after surgery, are described in [120] . The potential of developing data fusion based machine learning models which utilizes biomarkers from breathomics (metabolomics study of exhaled air) as a diagnostic tool is demonstrated in [121] .
Research in neurology has shown interest in electrophysiologic monitoring of patients to not only examine complex diseases under a new light but also develop next generation diagnostics and therapeutic devices. An article focusing on neurocritical care explores the different physiological monitoring systems specifically developed for the care of patients with disorders who require neurocritical care [122] . The authors of this article do not make specific recommendations about treatment, imaging, and intraoperative monitoring; instead they examine the potentials and implications of neuromonitoring with differeing quality of data and also provide guidance on developing research and application in this area. The development of multimodal monitoring for traumatic brain injury patients and individually tailored, patient specific care are examined in [123] . Zanatta et al. have investigated whether multimodal brain monitoring performed with TCD, EEG, and SEPs reduces the incidence of major neurologic complications in patients who underwent cardiac surgery. The authors evaluated whether the use of multimodal brain monitoring shortened the duration of mechanical ventilation required by patients as well as ICU and healthcare stays. The concepts of multimodal monitoring for secondary brain injury in neurocritical care as well as outline initial and future approaches using informatics tools for understanding and applying such data towards clinical care are described in [124] .
As complex physiological monitoring devices are getting smaller, cheaper, and more portable, personal monitoring devices are being used outside of clinical environments by both patients and enthusiasts alike. However, similar to clinical applications, combining information simultaneously collected from multiple portable devices can become challenging. Pantelopoulos and Bourbakis discussed the research and development of wearable biosensor systems and identified the advantages and shortcomings in this area of study [125] . Similarly, portable and connected electrocardiogram, blood pressure and body weight devices are used to set up a network based study of telemedicine [126] . The variety of fixed as well as mobile sensors available for data mining in the healthcare sector and how such data can be leveraged for developing patient care technologies are surveyed in [127] .
The advent of high-throughput sequencing methods has enabled researchers to study genetic markers over a wide range of population [22, 128] , improve efficiency by more than five orders of magnitude since sequencing of the human genome was completed [129] , and associate genetic causes of the phenotype in disease states [130] . Genome-wide analysis utilizing microarrays has been successful in analyzing traits across a population and contributed successfully in treatments of complex diseases such as Crohn's disease and agerelated muscular degeneration [130] .
Analytics of high-throughput sequencing techniques in genomics is an inherently big data problem as the human genome consists of 30,000 to 35,000 genes [16, 17] . Initiatives are currently being pursued over the timescale of years to integrate clinical data from the genomic level to the physiological level of a human being [22, 23] . These initiatives will help in delivering personalized care to each patient. Delivering recommendations in a clinical setting requires fast analysis of genome-scale big data in a reliable manner. This field is still in a nascent stage with applications in specific focus areas, such as cancer [131] [132] [133] [134] , because of cost, time, and labor intensive nature of analyzing this big data problem.
Big data applications in genomics cover a wide variety of topics. Here we focus on pathway analysis, in which functional effects of genes differentially expressed in an experiment or gene set of particular interest are analyzed, and the reconstruction of networks, where the signals measured using high-throughput techniques are analyzed to reconstruct underlying regulatory networks. These networks influence numerous cellular processes which affect the physiological state of a human being [135] .
Resources for inferring functional effects for "-omics" big data are largely based on statistical associations between observed gene expression changes and predicted functional effects. Experiment and analytical practices lead to error as well as batch effects [136, 137] . Interpretation of functional effects has to incorporate continuous increases in available genomic data and corresponding annotation of genes [25] . There are variety of tools, but no "gold standard" for functional pathway analysis of high-throughput genome-scale data [138] . Three generations of methods used for pathway analysis [25] are described as follows.
The first generation encompasses overrepresentation analysis approaches that determine the fraction of genes in a particular pathway found among the genes which are differentially expressed [25] . Examples of the first generation tools are Onto-Express [139, 140] , GoMiner [142] , and ClueGo [144] . The second generation includes functional class scoring approaches which incorporate expression level changes in individual genes as well as functionally similar genes [25] . GSEA [146] is a popular tool that belongs to the second generation of pathway analysis. The third generation includes pathway topology based tools which are publicly available pathway knowledge databases with detailed information of gene products interactions: how specific gene products interact with each other and the location where they interact [25] . Pathway-Express [148] is an example of a third generation tool that combines the knowledge of differentially expressed genes with biologically meaningful changes on a given pathway to perform pathway analysis.
Pathway analysis approaches do not attempt to make sense of high-throughput big data in biology as arising from the integrated operation of a dynamical system [25] . There are multiple approaches to analyzing genome-scale data using a dynamical system framework [135, 152, 159] . Due to the breadth of the field, in this section we mainly focus on techniques to infer network models from biological big data. Applications developed for network inference in systems biology for big data applications can be split into two broad categories consisting of reconstruction of metabolic networks and gene regulatory networks [135] . Various approaches of network inference vary in performance, and combining different approaches has shown to produce superior predictions [152, 160] .
Reconstruction of metabolic networks has advanced in last two decades. One objective is to develop an understanding of organism-specific metabolism through reconstruction of metabolic networks by integrating genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics high-throughput sequencing techniques [150, [161] [162] [163] [164] [165] [166] [167] . Constraint-based methods are widely applied to probe the genotype-phenotype relationship and attempt to overcome the limited availability of kinetic constants [168, 169] . There are multitude of challenges in terms of analyzing genome-scale data including the experiment and inherent biological noise, differences among experimental platforms, and connecting gene expression to reaction flux used in constraint-based methods [170, 171] .
Available reconstructed metabolic networks include Recon 1 [161] , Recon 2 [150] , SEED [163] , IOMA [165] , and MADE [172] . Recon 2 (an improvement over Recon 1) is a model to represent human metabolism and incorporates [139, 140] Pathway analysis Breast cancer [141] GoMiner [142] Pathway analysis Pancreatic cancer [143] ClueGo [144] Pathway analysis Colorectal tumors [145] GSEA [146] Pathway analysis Diabetes [147] Pathway-Express [148] P a t h w a y a n a l y s i s L e u k e m i a [ 149] Recon 2 [150] Reconstruction of metabolic networks Drug target prediction studies [151] Boolean methods [135, 152, 153] Reconstruction of gene regulatory networks Cardiac differentiation [154] ODE models [155] [156] [157] [158] Reconstruction of gene regulatory networks Cardiac development [158] 7,440 reactions involving 5,063 metabolites. Recon 2 has been expanded to account for known drugs for drug target prediction studies [151] and to study off-target effects of drugs [173] . Reconstruction of gene regulatory networks from gene expression data is another well developed field. Network inference methods can be split into five categories based on the underlying model in each case: regression, mutual information, correlation, Boolean regulatory networks, and other techniques [152] . Over 30 inference techniques were assessed after DREAM5 challenge in 2010 [152] . Performance varied within each category and there was no category found to be consistently better than the others. Different methods utilize different information available in experiments which can be in the form of time series, drug perturbation experiments, gene knockouts, and combinations of experimental conditions. A tree-based method (using ensembles of regression trees) [174] and two-way ANOVA (analysis of variance) method [175] gave the highest performance in a recent DREAM challenge [160] .
Boolean regulatory networks [135] are a special case of discrete dynamical models where the state of a node or a set of nodes exists in a binary state. The actual state of each node or set of nodes is determined by using Boolean operations on the state of other nodes in the network [153] . Boolean networks are extremely useful when amount of quantitative data is small [135, 153] but yield high number of false positives (i.e., when a given condition is satisfied while actually that is not the case) that may be reduced by using prior knowledge [176, 177] . Another bottleneck is that Boolean networks are prohibitively expensive when the number of nodes in network is large. This is due to the number of global states rising exponentially in the number of entities [135] . A method to overcome this bottleneck is to use clustering to break down the problem size. For example, Martin et al. [178] broke down a 34,000-probe microarray gene expression dataset into 23 sets of metagenes using clustering techniques. This Boolean model successfully captured the network dynamics for two different immunology microarray datasets. The dynamics of gene regulatory network can be captured using ordinary differential equations (ODEs) [155] [156] [157] [158] . This approach has been applied to determine regulatory network for yeast [155] . The study successfully captured the regulatory network which has been characterized using experiments by molecular biologists. Reconstruction of a gene regulatory network on a genome-scale system as a dynamical model is computationally intensive [135] . A parallelizeable dynamical ODE model has been developed to address this bottleneck [179] . It reduces the computational time to O( 2 ) from time taken in other approaches which is O( 3 ) or O( 2 log ) [179] . Determining connections in the regulatory network for a problem of the size of the human genome, consisting of 30,000 to 35,000 genes [16, 17] , will require exploring close to a billion possible connections. The dynamical ODE model has been applied to reconstruct the cardiogenic gene regulatory network of the mammalian heart [158] . A summary of methods and toolkits with their applications is presented in Table 2 .
Big data analytics which leverages legions of disparate, structured, and unstructured data sources is going to play a vital role in how healthcare is practiced in the future. One can already see a spectrum of analytics being utilized, aiding in the decision making and performance of healthcare personnel and patients. Here we focused on three areas of interest: medical image analysis, physiological signal processing, and genomic data processing. The exponential growth of the volume of medical images forces computational scientists to come up with innovative solutions to process this large volume of data in tractable timescales. The trend of adoption of computational systems for physiological signal processing from both research and practicing medical professionals is growing steadily with the development of some very imaginative and incredible systems that help save lives. Developing a detailed model of a human being by combining physiological data and high-throughput "-omics" techniques has the potential to enhance our knowledge of disease states and help in the development of blood based diagnostic tools [20] [21] [22] . Medical image analysis, signal processing of physiological data, and integration of physiological and "-omics" data face similar challenges and opportunities in dealing with disparate structured and unstructured big data sources.
Medical image analysis covers many areas such as image acquisition, formation/reconstruction, enhancement, transmission, and compression. New technological advances have resulted in higher resolution, dimension, and availability of multimodal images which lead to the increase in accuracy of diagnosis and improvement of treatment. However, integrating medical images with different modalities or with other medical data is a potential opportunity. New analytical frameworks and methods are required to analyze these data in a clinical setting. These methods address some concerns, opportunities, and challenges such as features from images which can improve the accuracy of diagnosis and the ability to utilize disparate sources of data to increase the accuracy of diagnosis and reducing cost and improve the accuracy of processing methods such as medical image enhancement, registration, and segmentation to deliver better recommendations at the clinical level.
Although there are some very real challenges for signal processing of physiological data to deal with, given the current state of data competency and nonstandardized structure, there are opportunities in each step of the process towards providing systemic improvements within the healthcare research and practice communities. Apart from the obvious need for further research in the area of data wrangling, aggregating, and harmonizing continuous and discrete medical data formats, there is also an equal need for developing novel signal processing techniques specialized towards physiological signals. Research pertaining to mining for biomarkers and clandestine patterns within biosignals to understand and predict disease cases has shown potential in providing actionable information. However, there are opportunities for developing algorithms to address data filtering, interpolation, transformation, feature extraction, feature selection, and so forth. Furthermore, with the notoriety and improvement of machine learning algorithms, there are opportunities in improving and developing robust CDSS for clinical prediction, prescription, and diagnostics [180, 181] .
Integration of physiological data and high-throughput "-omics" techniques to deliver clinical recommendations is the grand challenge for systems biologists. Although associating functional effects with changes in gene expression has progressed, the continuous increase in available genomic data and its corresponding effects of annotation of genes and errors from experiment and analytical practices make analyzing functional effect from high-throughput sequencing techniques a challenging task.
Reconstruction of networks on the genome-scale is an ill-posed problem. Robust applications have been developed for reconstruction of metabolic networks and gene regulatory networks. Limited availability of kinetic constants is a bottleneck and hence various models attempt to overcome this limitation. There is an incomplete understanding for this largescale problem as gene regulation, effect of different network architectures, and evolutionary effects on these networks are still being analyzed [135] . To address these concerns, the combination of careful design of experiments and model development for reconstruction of networks will help in saving time and resources spent in building understanding of regulation in genome-scale networks. The opportunity of addressing the grand challenge requires close cooperation among experimentalists, computational scientists, and clinicians.
Ashwin Belle and Kayvan Najarian have patents and pending patents pertinent to some of the methodologies surveyed and cited in this paper. Raghuram Thiagarajan, S. M. Reza Soroushmehr, Fatemeh Navidi, and Daniel A. Beard have no conflict of interests.
Ashwin Belle is the primary author for the section on signal processing and contributed to the whole paper, Raghuram Thiagarajan is the primary author for the section on genomics and contributed to the whole papaer, and S. M. Reza Soroushmehr is the primary author for the image processing section and contributed to the whole paper. Fatemeh Navidi contributed to the section on image processing. Daniel A. Beard contributed to and supervised the whole paper. Kayvan Najarian contributed to and supervised the whole paper. All authors have read and approved the final version of this paper. Ashwin Belle, Raghuram Thiagarajan, and S. M. Reza Soroushmehr contributed equally to this work.
The watercolor effect (WCE), first described by Pinna (1987) , has provoked great interest over the last decade (Pinna, Brelstaff, & Spillmann, 2001) . In its classic configuration, it is generated by two adjacent and thin, parallel, wavy contours of different chromaticity separating two regions in the visual field. The color of one of the contours appears to diffuse into the region it borders, filling it with a washed-out shade of the contour. The fill-in can occur over a large region of the visual field, raising the possibility that the phenomenon relates to high-level processes (Spillmann & Werner, 1996) , such as surface perception (Pinna et al., 2001) , figure-ground segregation (Pinna, Werner, & Spillmann, 2003; von der Heydt & Pierson, 2006; , or other aspects of perceptual organization (Pinna, 2005) .
The strength of the WCE is influenced by several factors, including the relative luminances of the contours (Devinck, Delahunt, Hardy, Spillmann, & Werner, 2006; Devinck & Knoblauch, 2012) , the width of the inducing contours (Pinna et al., 2001; Devinck, Gerardin, Dojat, & Knoblauch, 2014) , and the continuity and contiguity of the contour pairs (Devinck & Spillmann, 2009 ). Most studies have assessed the strength of the effect with matching or hue cancellation Citation: Gerardin, P., Devinck, F., Dojat, M., & Knoblauch, K. (2014) . Contributions of contour frequency, amplitude, and luminance to the watercolor effect estimated by conjoint measurement. Journal of Vision, 14(4):9, 1-15, http://www. journalofvision.org/content/14/4/9, doi:10.1167/14.4.9.
techniques (Devinck, Delahunt, Hardy, Spillmann, & Werner, 2005; von der Heydt & Pierson, 2006) . More recently, paired comparisons have been used to quantify the phenomenon. Cao, Yazdanbakhsh, and Mingolla (2011) judged which of a pair of stimuli showed a more salient brightness filling-in for an achromatic version of the WCE. The strength of the WCE was related to the probability of distinguishing two patterns. Devinck and Knoblauch used maximum likelihood difference scaling (MLDS) to estimate the strength of the WCE as a function of the luminance of the interior inducing contour. MLDS involves comparisons between large stimulus differences or intervals and leads to an interval scale that describes changes in stimulus appearance along a single dimension (Maloney & Yang, 2003; Knoblauch & Maloney, 2012b) .
MLDS is a promising technique because it is based on a Gaussian, equal-variance signal-detection model (Knoblauch & Maloney, 2012b) . The estimated perceptual scales have been shown to predict discrimination behavior, thus yielding an integrated description of performance from threshold to perception (Devinck & Knoblauch, 2012) . A disadvantage is that the method only permits evaluation of one stimulus dimension at a time. This difficulty, however, is overcome by the paradigm of conjoint measurement (Luce & Tukey, 1964; Krantz, Luce, Suppes, & Tversky, 1971; Falmagne, 1985; Roberts, 1985; Knoblauch & Maloney, 2012b) , which permits estimating interval scales for two or more dimensions from the same experimental data. In this paradigm, the observer judges one pair of stimuli in each trial, but the levels of the dimensions being studied vary independently across the two stimuli from trial to trial. In this way, the influence on judgments of varying one dimension while the other is fixed can be evaluated. Ho et al. (2008) recently developed a Gaussian, equal-variance, signal-detection model of conjoint measurement and used maximum likelihood to estimate the underlying perceptual scales and to test several hypotheses on how observers combine information across dimensions (maximum likelihood conjoint measurement or MLCM). We used this procedure to study the joint influences of luminance contrast, contour frequency, and amplitude on the WCE.

Six observers (two male and four female) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision volunteered for the experiments (mean age 6 SD: 33 6 8 years). Three participated in all three conditions, two in only one condition, and one in two of the conditions. All observers but one (author PG) were naive, and all had normal color vision as assessed by a Farnsworth Panel D15. Observers who required optical corrections wore their glasses while performing the experiments.
All experiments were in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
The experiments were performed in a dark room. Stimuli were displayed on an Eizo FlexScan T562-T color monitor (42 cm) driven by a MacBook Pro (2.2 GHz). The screen had a resolution of 800 · 600 pixels and was run at a field rate of 100 Hz, noninterlaced. The voltage-phosphor luminance relationship was linearized with look-up tables. Calibration of the screen was performed with a Minolta CS-100 chroma meter. Observers were placed at a distance of 57.3 cm from the screen.
Each stimulus was generated with Matlab R2009b (http://www.mathworks.com/) and displayed with the Psychophysics Toolbox extensions (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997) . All stimuli were displayed on a white background (128 cd/m 2 , CIE xy ¼ 0.29, 0.30). The contour pairs that defined the stimuli were each of width 16 min, that is, 8 min for the interior and exterior contours, each. The outer contour was purple (CIE xy ¼ 0.32, 0.19) and the inner orange (CIE xy ¼ 0.48, 0.34). The stimuli were also specified in the DKL color space (Derrington, Krauskopf, & Lennie, 1984) with purple and orange contours at azimuths of 3208 and 458, respectively. Control stimuli were identical except that the contours were interlaced and generated little fillingin (Figure 1c) .
For independent control of the frequency and the amplitude of the WCE contours, they were constructed as Fourier descriptors (Zahn & Roskies, 1972) . Each stimulus was defined by a circle of 48 diameter whose radius was modulated sinusoidally as a function of angle according to the equation
where R is the stimulus radius at angle h, r the average radius of the stimulus, A the modulation, and f the frequency in cycles per revolution (cpr). The stimuli are then plotted by transforming the polar coordinates (R, h) to rectangular coordinates (x, y) with the equations xðR; hÞ ¼ RðhÞsinð2phÞ ð 2Þ yðR; hÞ ¼ RðhÞcosð2phÞ:
For each condition, a factorial design was defined in which five levels along each of two dimensions (frequency, amplitude, or luminance) were chosen, and all levels crossed, creating a table of 25 stimuli. Figure  1a shows an example for frequency and amplitude with frequency varying across columns and amplitude across rows. The five frequencies were equally spaced, ranging from 4 to 20 cpr. The five amplitudes evaluated ranged from 0.04 to 0.2, and the five luminances of the orange contour ranged from 0.1 to 0.9 equally spaced in elevation in DKL space. In two other conditions, the dimensions of frequency/luminance and amplitude/ luminance were similarly crossed.
Observers were run in three conditions (luminance/ frequency, luminance/amplitude, frequency/amplitude) with a single condition tested within a session. In each trial, a pair of different stimuli from the stimulus table for that condition (e.g., Figure 1a ) was chosen at random and presented to the observer. Observers judged which of the two patterns evoked the most salient fill-in color. To test that observers responded according to the fill-in appearance and not on the basis of some other stimulus feature(s), an equal number of test and control stimuli were interleaved in each session (e.g., Figure 1b and c). There are 25 · 24/2 ¼ 300 such pairs. In each trial, either a pair of test or control stimuli were presented. A session consisted of a random presentation of all 600 test and control pairs. Each condition was repeated in five sessions, yielding 1,500 test and 1,500 control trials per condition for a given observer.
We modeled the data following the framework described by Ho et al. (2008) for analyzing conjoint measurement experiments (see also chapter 8, Knoblauch & Maloney, 2012b) . They define three nested models that can be fit to describe the choices of the observers in order of complexity: an independence model, an additive model, and a saturated model. We begin the description with the additive model and then describe the simpler and more complex models with respect to it.
We represent the stimulus levels along the two dimensions of a condition by a variable / ij , i, j ¼ 1, . . . 5, where the indices refer to two of the dimensions in the set (luminance, frequency, amplitude), for example, a row and column, respectively, of Figure 1a . In the additive model, we suppose that each of the two dimensions contributes to a filling-in response, w 1 i , w 2 j , respectively, which depends on its physical intensity level, and that the filling-in response, w ij , to a stimulus, / ij , is the sum of the component responses
We assume that the observer judges the stimulus / ij to display stronger filling-in than the stimulus / kl when
This representation yields an interval scale (Krantz et al., 1971) . Note, for example, that by rearranging Equation 5 as follows,
the decision rule is equivalent to a comparison of intervals across dimensions. It is unlikely, however, that the observer would make the same response in every trial when the two stimuli are very similar. To incorporate this inherent variability of human responses, we suppose that the decision variable, D ijkl , is contaminated by internal noise so that the observer chooses the first stimulus exactly when
where each ijkl is a draw from a distribution of independent and identically distributed normal variables with l ¼ 0 and variance ¼ 4r 2 . This is an equalvariance, Gaussian signal-detection model. The coefficient of four on the variance parameterizes the estimated scale values so that variance of the response along each dimension is equal to r 2 . As a result, the estimated response values w k i /r are distributed as normal variables with r 2 ¼ 1 and are, thus, on the same scale as the sensitivity measure d 0 from signal detection theory (Green & Swets, 1966) .
With p intensity levels sampled along each dimension and the estimate of the variance of , there are 2p þ 1 parameters in the model. The reparameterizations of the scale described above suggest that we may multiply the estimated values by any constant without changing the model predictions of the observer's responses. In fact, we may similarly add any constant to the scales with similar results. To fix the estimated scales, we set the lowest value of each scale to zero.
This eliminates two parameters from the fit. In addition, by making r 2 ¼ 1, we eliminate one more so that the fitting process requires estimating 2p -2 parameters. The parameterization that we propose is slightly different from that used by Ho et al. (2008) , who estimated r but normalized the estimated functions so that the maximum scale value was unity.
Both parameterizations yield identical predictions of performance.
The additive model implies that there are component functions representing the internal response to each physical dimension and that the overall response to a stimulus is the simple sum of these component responses. We illustrate this in Figure 2c and d. In Figure 2c , we show two hypothetical component responses, w 1 and w 2 , each of which, for simplicity, is a linear function of the stimulus level. Stimulus level here and elsewhere is indicated by an index, not physical units. This convention, as used elsewhere (Ho et al., 2008; Knoblauch & Maloney, 2012b) , allows the scales for both dimensions to be plotted together. The response to any stimulus with levels i and j, respectively, along the two stimulus dimensions is represented by the sum of their component responses. As an example, consider a stimulus of level three along the first dimension and level four along the second. The component responses to the level along each dimension are indicated by the two black points. Figure 2d shows the set of summed responses for all pairings of the two dimensions with the base dimension corresponding to w 2 and the parameter indicated along each curve corresponding to w 1 . Each curve has the shape of the component curve for w 2 but is displaced vertically by the value of w 1 , resulting in a set of parallel contours. Analogous to a linear model, we could say that each dimension shows a main effect but no interaction. The summed response to the stimulus with the levels. indicated in Figure 2c is indicated by the black point.
A simpler model than the additive model is obtained by assuming that the observer's judgments depend on only one of the component dimensions. In that case, the decision variable reduces to
where we assume that only the first dimension contributes to the judgments. Ho et al. (2008) call this the independent-property model, but we will refer to it as just the independence model. The independence model requires estimating only p -1 parameters. The independence model is illustrated in Figure 2a and b. In Figure 2a , the component w 1 increases with stimulus level along the first dimension, but w 2 is flat or independent of the level of the second dimension. The summed responses are indicated in Figure 2b by a set of lines of zero slope that are vertically displaced by the responses along the w 1 curve. In analogy to a linear model, there is a significant main effect of the first dimension but not of the second.
Finally, the additive model may not suffice to provide a satisfactory description of the observer's responses. Ho et al. (2008) describe the full model, which includes interaction terms, w variable is
This model requires the estimation of p 2 -1 parameters, one less than the number of stimuli tested, and will be referred to as the saturated model. An example of response curves that might result from a saturated model are shown in Figure 2e . The important feature is that the curves are not parallel and, thus, the curves cannot be explained by a simple additive combination of component curves as in the previous two cases.
The three models described above form a nested sequence. The estimated scale values with the above constraints that best predict the observers' responses are fitted by maximum likelihood (Ho et al., 2008) . Because the decision variable is linear in the estimated coefficients, however, the fitting procedure is simply implemented as a generalized linear model with a binomial family (McCullagh & Nelder, 1989) . Standard errors and confidence intervals of estimated scale values for comparing model fits were estimated using a bootstrap procedure (Knoblauch & Maloney, 2012a , 2012b . All analyses were performed using the open source software R (R Development Core Team, 2012) with functions from the MLCM package (Knoblauch & Maloney, 2012a , 2012b .
Judgments from the observers for test and control conditions for each of the pairings of the three dimensions are shown in Figure 3a through c in a format introduced by Ho et al. (2008) and termed a conjoint proportion plot (CPP) by Knoblauch and Maloney (2012a) . Each CPP summarizes the proportion of times that the ordinate stimulus, S kl , was judged to show a greater fill-in than the abscissa stimulus, S ij , coded according to the grey levels shown in the color bar at the right of each set of graphs, for every stimulus pair presented. The levels along the two dimensions are represented along each axis using a scheme in which a 5 · 5 outer grid demarcates the stimulus levels along one dimension (e.g., amplitude in Figure 3a) , and the levels of the second dimension are represented as an inner subgrid nested within each square of the outer grid (e.g., frequency in the same figure) . As the responses are combined across random left/right orders in the presentation-only the upper left triangle of a CPP is unique and displayed.
In Figure 3a through c, the set of results from each observer is indicated by his/her initials above the pair of CPPs for test (upper) and control (lower) stimuli. Figure 3d shows the expected pattern of responses for an ideal observer for whom the judgments are based on the level of only one of the two stimulus dimensions. The left CPP shows the results when the judgments depend solely on the outer dimensions (Dim 1) and the right on the inner (Dim 2). In general, the CPP for the test stimuli resemble more closely the ideal pattern displayed for the inner dimension, suggesting that the contribution of frequency dominated when both frequency and amplitude covaried but that luminance contributed more strongly to the judgments when paired with the other two dimensions. The patterns do, however, deviate from the ideal, indicating contributions from both dimensions.
There is an important difference in the procedure used here from that reported by Ho et al. (2008) . They tested stimuli that varied along the dimensions of roughness and glossiness and asked different observers to judge which member of a pair appeared rougher or shinier. Thereby, they could estimate the contamination of the one dimension to judgments along the other. In our experiments, the task is not necessarily related to the stimulus dimensions. Thus, one cannot be sure a priori that the observer is actually basing his/her judgments on the stated criterion. Instead, the observer may simply be judging the variation along the two dimensions manipulated, that is, which stimulus has a higher frequency contour, amplitude, or luminance. If observers were performing in this manner, then we would expect to see the same pattern of responses in the CPPs for control and test stimuli. By and large, however, the patterns are quite different with the control CPP patterns appearing to be random. The principal exception to this is evident in the control data of observer OH for the amplitude/luminance condition ( Figure 3b ) and, to a lesser extent, for observer DL in the same condition. In these two cases, then, we cannot exclude that either the observers perceived a small amount of filling-in or, alternatively, that they showed a tendency to base their judgments on the physical dimensions of the stimulus for a subset of the trials rather than on the perceived filling-in per se. For example, Figure 4a indicates that the contribution of the frequency dimension to the filling-in strength increases with the frequency of the contour while the amplitude dimension shows a smaller effect that increases between the first and second levels tested for all observers but one (SJ shows a relatively flat amplitude contribution) and then remains approximately constant. These results contrast with the scales estimated for the control stimuli that show no difference and very little effect of either dimension on the strength of filling-in.
Similarly, Figure 4b shows that the contribution of luminance to the filling-in increases with the luminance of the orange contour while the amplitude contributions are similar to those obtained in Figure 4a with the exception of observer SJ who shows a stronger luminance contribution than in the previous condition. The controls show little influence of either dimension. The exception is again shown by observer OH, consistent with the CPP plots in Figure 3b . Note also, that, for this condition, the responses of observers PG and OH to the test stimuli result mostly from the luminance dimension, again, as suggested by comparison of their CPP plots to the ideal cases. Figure 4c shows the contributions of luminance and frequency when these two dimensions are varied. The luminance scales are similar to those in Figure 4b , and the frequency scales resemble those obtained in Figure  4a . As in the preceding figures, the control stimuli provide little evidence for filling-in in that the contributions of each dimension to the judgments remain low as the scale value is increased.
Finally, Figure 4d shows the means and 95% confidence intervals across observers for each pairing of the three dimensions. The scales for the control conditions show little effect with confidence intervals overlapping zero, and confidence intervals for test conditions exclude zero with the exception of the highest amplitude in the amplitude/luminance condition. The large confidence intervals for some of the test conditions reflect the individual differences shown in the previous graphs. Interestingly, the average scale for each dimension tends to be similar, independently of the other dimension with which it is paired, a point we will examine in more detail below.
We consider the possibility that the contribution of only one dimension independently of the other suffices to account for observers' judgments, that is, the independence model. We chose to model the data based on the dimension that generated the strongest contributions under the additive model. We will refer to this dimension as the primary dimension and the other as the secondary dimension. Specifically, luminance was the primary dimension when paired with frequency or amplitude, and frequency was the primary dimension when paired with amplitude.
We compare the models by plotting the estimated scales from both models in the same graph for each observer. For reference, we are comparing the two models shown in Figure 2a and c. Comparisions between additive (solid) and independence (grey dashed) model fits are displayed in Figure 5 with 95% confidence intervals of the additive estimates displayed. By construction, the contribution of the secondary dimension is fixed at zero for the independence model.
The comparisons in Figure 5 indicate that scale estimates of the primary dimension under the independent model tend to correspond closely to those under the additive model. For observer SJ in the amplitude/luminance condition and for all observers in the frequency/luminance condition, however, the estimate of the primary dimension contribution for the independence model falls outside the confidence limits for the additive model. This is sufficient to reject the independence model for these conditions. Moreover, in all cases but one (observer SJ for the amplitude/ frequency experiment), the secondary dimension of the additive model differs significantly from zero, the prediction along the secondary dimension for independence, thus leading to rejection of the independence model in nearly every case. Thus, although the contribution of amplitude to the judgments is small, it is significant.
To compare the additive and saturated model fits, we adopt the format of Figure 2d and e in which the estimated scale values are plotted as a function of the stimulus index along one dimension with the other dimension treated as a parameter. The comparisons are shown for each pair of dimensions and for each observer in the panels of Figure 6 . The results are noisier than for the preceding comparison. However, for most of the comparisons, the confidence intervals for the saturated model (solid) overlap the curves for the additive model (dashed), suggesting that the simpler additive model suffices to describe the data. Most of the exceptions concern the amplitude dimension that, as we saw above, only weakly contributes to the judgments compared to the frequency or the luminance and displays more variability across conditions. In addition, the deviations that occur are not systematic across observers.
Residual differences between the two models are shown as grey level plots in Figure 7a through c. The differences have been normalized with respect to the standard errors of the saturated model fits. In general, there is no obvious pattern in the residuals although the frequency/amplitude condition appears noisier than the other two. For this condition, eight of the 125 residuals (6.4%) exceed a magnitude of two whereas none of the residuals exceed a value of two for the other two conditions.
To what extent are the estimated contributions from each dimension invariant with respect to the context of the judgments? For example, does the estimated scale for the contribution of luminance depend on whether either frequency or amplitude is the covarying dimension? The same question can be posed for each dimension with respect to the other two. Figure 8a shows the estimated contribution of luminance to the fill-in color when the contour frequency (red) or its amplitude (blue) is the covarying dimension as a function of the luminance index for the four observers who performed both experiments. The scales obtained under the different conditions agree very well for all of the observers, and the overlap in the confidence intervals lends no support to the importance of the differences in the means.
Similarly, Figure 8b and c shows the comparisons of the scales obtained for the frequency and amplitude dimensions, respectively. There is good agreement across conditions for the frequency scales for observers PG and SJ. For OH, the scales agree in form although the sensitivity to frequency is higher when paired with the luminance than with the amplitude dimension.
There seems to be less agreement between the scales based on the amplitude dimension. This is most marked for observer SJ, for whom the contribution of amplitude to the judgments is insignificant when paired with frequency but significantly higher, based on the nonoverlap of confidence intervals, when paired with the luminance dimension. As noted previously (see Figure 4a and b) , however, the amplitude contributions tended to be small and more variable. This is borne out by the averages across observers shown in Figure 8d that show good agreement in the scales measured along each dimension and agrees with the averages based on all observers from Figure 4d . The average data show the amplitude contribution asymptotes by the second stimulus level, which corresponds to an amplitude of 0.08. The frequency contribution asymptotes by the third level, which corresponds to a value of 12 cpr.
We used the MLCM technique to quantify the contributions to the filling-in strength of the WCE of three stimulus dimensions. An important difference from the previous use of this technique by Ho et al. (2008) is that the perceptual judgment required of the observers in our experiments is not directly linked to either of the stimulus dimensions whereas in Ho et al. (2008) it was. Thus, in theory, the observers could have simply based their judgments directly on the stimulus dimensions manipulated (luminance, frequency, and/or amplitude) rather than the perceptual criterion of filling-in strength. To evaluate this possibility, we included control stimuli during the sessions for which very little, if any, filling-in was expected to occur. If the observers based their judgments on the manipulated dimensions rather than the perceived filling-in, then the estimated contributions to the judgments for control and test stimuli would be the same. In fact, the model estimates for the control conditions were severely attenuated in all conditions, thus supporting that the test conditions do reflect judgments with respect to filling-in.
As shown previously using a difference scaling technique (Devinck & Knoblauch, 2012) , the strength of the WCE depends importantly on the luminance of the interior contour. We show here, as well, that the filling-in is stronger for higher frequencies of the contour modulation although the influence of contour frequency asymptotes at about 12 cpr. Probably because of its small value, the estimates of the contribution of amplitude to the phenomenon were found to be more variable across conditions and observers. In addition, the results are best supported by a model in which the responses to the separate dimensions contribute in an additive fashion.
It has previously been reported that the WCE is present although weaker with straight contours (Pinna et al., 2001) . Our results confirm this observation in that, for nearly all conditions, the amplitude contribution was greater for higher amplitudes than for the lowest value tested. We did not test a frequency of zero cpr or a zero amplitude because it would have led to a singular set of conditions, a row and column of identical stimuli in the frequency/amplitude matrix of stimuli (Figure 1) . Additionally, because we fix the lowest perceptual scale values at zero in order to make the estimated coefficients identifiable, our measurements of the strength of the phenomenon are only in reference to this value. A measure of the strength at this lowest value could have been obtained by including paired comparisons between test and control stimuli in the experiment, but this would have quadrupled the number of stimulus pairs to evaluate.
We performed the experiments analyzing dimensions pairwise, that is, two-way experiments. Following the logic of factorial design, it might be argued that it would be more efficient to perform an experiment with all three attributes permitted to covary simultaneously, that is, a three-way experiment. Employing five levels along each dimension, as here, would generate 5 3 ¼ 125 different stimuli and 125 · 124/2 ¼ 7,750 paired comparisons, which could be reasonably argued is excessive. Simulation results for two-way experiments suggest that it is the number of total judgments and not the number of conditions that determines the precision of the estimates (Knoblauch & Maloney, 2012b) . Similar results have been obtained for the MLDS technique (Maloney & Yang, 2003) . This raises the possibility of obtaining good scale estimates for a threeway experiment by subsampling from the full set of stimulus pairs although it will be necessary to verify such a conjecture via simulation.
Comparing the dimensions pairwise permitted us to evaluate whether the estimated contributions of each dimension to the observer's judgments were independent of the contributions of the second, covarying dimension. The results support such an invariance for the luminance and frequency dimensions but are more equivocal for the amplitude although all three dimensions are consistent with invariance for the average data. We suspect that the failures of invariance along the amplitude dimension stem more from its weak contribution to the WCE, rendering it difficult to estimate with the number of trials that we employed and possible criterion shifts of the observers. These hypotheses remain to be tested, however. 
T he most common surgery performed in children for treatment of recurrent otitis media with effusion is the insertion of a tympanostomy tube into the eardrum. 1 However, otorrhea is a common complication after their insertion. The vast majority (90%-95%) of cases of acute otitis media with otorrhea through tympanostomy tubes (AOMT) occur in children aged 1 to 12 years, and typically 2 to 6 episodes of AOMT are experienced. 2, 3 Topical ciprofloxacin is an effective and safe therapy for AOMT 4, 5 and chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM). 6 -8 Bacteria commonly isolated from patients with AOMT include Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 3 Because of the inflammatory response induced by these microorganisms, topical corticosteroids have often been given empirically together with topical antibiotics in an effort to reduce the sequelae. Although several studies demonstrated the efficacy and safety of antibiotic-corticosteroid combinations in the treatment or prophylaxis of AOMT, 9 -14 definitive evidence of the benefit of adding a topical corticosteroid has not been shown in randomized, controlled trials.
Recently, we reported on the efficacy and safety of a combination of topical dexamethasone 0.1% and ciprofloxacin 0.3% in children with AOMT. 15 Otorrhea resolved more rapidly with the combination preparation than with ciprofloxacin alone and produced significantly greater clinical responses early after completion of a 7-day course of treatment. 15 The present study was designed to evaluate further the efficacy and the safety of the topical ciprofloxacin/ dexamethasone combination by comparing it with the related fluoroquinolone ofloxacin administered alone in children with AOMT. Topical ofloxacin was chosen as the comparator for this study because of its reported efficacy and safety in ear infections, including AOMT, 16, 17 CSOM, 18 and acute otitis externa. 19 
This study was a randomized, prospective, observer-masked, parallel-group clinical trial comparing ciprofloxacin 0.3%/dexa-methasone 0.1% otic suspension with ofloxacin 0.3% otic solution in children with AOMT conducted at 39 centers in the United States and Canada. The primary objectives were to 1) demonstrate that ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone is at least as effective as ofloxacin for clinical and microbiologic response at the test of cure (TOC) visit and 2) evaluate the safety and efficacy of ciprofloxacin/ dexamethasone otic suspension in pediatric patients with AOMT. The study protocol was approved by independent ethics committees/institutional review boards at each investigative site and conducted in accordance with the ethical principles contained in the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents or legal guardians of all patients before enrollment.
A total of 599 children who were aged 6 months to 12 years and had patent tympanostomy tubes and a clinical diagnosis of uncomplicated AOM with otorrhea (drainage visible to the parent or guardian) of Յ3 weeks' duration in 1 or both ears were enrolled into the study. Patients were randomized to receive either 1) topical ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone otic suspension (Ciprodex; Alcon Research, Ltd, Fort Worth, TX) 4 drops twice daily for 7 days or 2) topical ofloxacin otic solution (Floxin; Daiichi Pharmaceutical Corp, Montvale, NJ) 5 drops twice daily for 10 days. Because of the physical distinction and difference in administration schedules between the 2 treatments, the study was not double blinded, but it was observer masked such that those conducting the clinical observations were unaware of the treatment assignments.
Patients who were not eligible for enrollment included those in whom otorrhea had been present for Ͼ3 weeks and those with acute or malignant otitis externa. Key differences between AOM patients who had otorrhea and were enrolled in the study compared with patients who had acute otitis externa and were excluded from the trial included the absence or presence of pain on palpation of the pinna and the degree of edema or erythema present in the external ear canal. Additional exclusions were known or suspected fungal or mycobacterial ear infections, a history of or active viral infection of the tympanic membrane, mastoiditis, or infections requiring systemic antibacterial therapy. Patients were also excluded when there was a requirement for otologic surgery (except that confined to the tympanic membrane) in the previous year or when they presented with or had a history of diabetes, immunosuppressive disorders, acute or chronic renal disease, active hepatitis, chronic nasal obstruction and/or persistent rhinorrhea, complicating structural abnormalities, known or suspected quinolone hypersensitivity, and, in girls, menarche. Patients were not permitted to receive topical (otic or ophthalmic) corticosteroids or antibiotics concurrently or within the preceding 3 days, systemic corticosteroids within the preceding 7 days, inhaled corticosteroids at doses Ն800 g/d, topical antibiotics for skin infections within the preceding 7 days, topical otic analgesics/anesthetics or antiseptic washes, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, with the exception of oral acetaminophen for relief of pain.
Eligible patients were evaluated at 4 scheduled visits: baseline (day 1), on therapy (3 ϩ 2 days), end of therapy (11 ϩ 2 days), and TOC (18 ϩ 3 days). At the baseline visit, a complete clinical assessment was performed. The ear canal first was cleaned of all fluid and debris via suction, and then a culture specimen was obtained from the lumen of the tube under direct microscopic vision, paying particular attention to avoid contamination by contact with the surface of the external auditory canal. Ear cultures were taken in all patients at baseline and were repeated only in patients who were discontinued from the study as a result of treatment failure or adverse events. A specimen was obtained from the lumen of the tympanostomy tube from any patient when the physician declared a "clinical failure," regardless of the visit day. The parents or guardians were instructed in the use of patient diaries and the need for avoiding significant water immersion of the ear(s). At subsequent visits, clinical assessments were repeated to assess responses, patient diaries were reviewed, and adverse events were recorded. Audiologic evaluations, including speech reception threshold, were conducted by certified audiologists in children aged 4 to 12 years at the baseline and TOC visits.
Three primary efficacy variables were selected for evaluation at the test of cure (TOC) visit. 1) Clinical response to therapy (patients who were rated as cured/resolved by the investigator) based on a 4-point scale (0, cured/resolved; 1, improved; 2, not changed; 3, worsened compared with the baseline visit). An overall clinical response of cured/resolved was defined as the absence of otorrhea at the TOC visit. Improved was defined as a significant improvement in clinical signs or symptoms compared with the baseline (day 1) visit. 2) Microbiologic response (success or failure) in patients with positive pretherapy cultures. In the event of a clinical failure (and the taking of an additional ear specimen for culture), there were several possible microbiologic outcomes: a) "microbiologic failure" as a result of the persistence of pretherapy pathogen(s), b) "microbiologic failure" as a result of superinfection (if a new pathogen was recovered during therapy), and c) "microbiologic failure" as a result of reinfection (if a new pathogen was recovered after the end of therapy). 3) Treatment failure rate based on the number of patients who were discontinued from the study because they did not respond to assigned therapy. Secondary efficacy variables included time to cessation of otorrhea as recorded twice daily in the patient's diary (0, absent; 1, present) and as assessed by the physician at each study visit (0, absent; 1, present); physicians' assessment of clinical response on a 4-point scale (0, cured/resolved; 1, improved; 2, no change; 3, worsened) by visit; and otic discharge volume (0, absent; 1, scant; 2, moderate; 3, severe) at each visit. Scant discharge was defined as a little fluid (serous, mucoid, or mucopurulent) accumulating in the anterior sulcus but the tube was still clearly visible in its entirety. Moderate discharge was defined as the anterior sulcus being full and the fluid comes to or nearly to the edge of the tympanostomy tube. Part of the tympanostomy tube may be covered with fluid. Copious discharge was defined as not being able to see the tube until fluid was aspirated from the ear canal. Fluid often recurs during the course of the examination, even after it has been suctioned.
The safety evaluation was conducted on all patients who were randomized into the trial and received at least 1 dose of study drug. The safety analysis was based on the extent of exposure to the study drug, adverse events, and audiometry examination. The occurrence of adverse effects was assessed at each study visit and via questioning of parents or guardians during daily telephone calls relating to completion of the patient diaries. All adverse events were recorded in the patients' case report forms. Patients who experienced adverse events that, in the opinion of the investigator, presented a significant risk to their safety or well-being were withdrawn from the study. Data from the exit audiometry examinations were evaluated to determine whether any clinically significant decrease in hearing had occurred.
The primary statistical objective was to demonstrate that ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone was at least as effective (noninferior) as ofloxacin treatment in clinical and microbiologic response at the TOC visit. Two-sided 95% confidence intervals for the difference in proportions between the 2 treatment groups were constructed. Noninferiority was demonstrated for both variables, and the confidence interval constructed around these differences did not include 0. This result enabled statistical testing for superiority, using 2 tests of independence. For analysis of secondary variables, the number and proportion of patients per response in each treatment group was presented and assessed using LSMEANS (Mixed Model Analysis of Variance) or the 2 test as appropriate. The log-rank test (Kaplan-Meier survival analysis) was conducted to compare median time to cessation of otorrhea between the 2 treatments.
A total of 599 patients (297 in the ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone group and 302 in the ofloxacin group) were randomized to treatment and assessable for the intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis. Of these, 424 (208 in the ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone group and 216 in the ofloxacin group) were included in the modified ITT analyses in that they had received treatment, had met inclusion/exclu-sion criteria at baseline, and had a positive culture for bacteria on day 1. The modified per protocol data set composed a total of 357 patients (182 in the ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone group and 175 in the ofloxacin group) who received drug treatment, met inclusion/exclusion criteria at baseline, were culture positive, and presented at all scheduled study visits.

Study demographics for all 599 patients enrolled are summarized in Table 1 . The mean age of all patients in the ITT data set was 2.45 years (standard deviation: 2.37 years), with a range from 6 months to 12 years. No statistically significant differences were identified between the 2 groups with respect to age, ethnicity, affected ear(s), or discharge volume. There was a difference in baseline sex, with more boys than girls randomized in both treatment groups. This imbalance was exaggerated in the ofloxacin group (67% compared with 58%; P ϭ .0291). However, this sex difference did not affect the outcomes of the study and is likely a spurious result that arose because of the many baseline tests that were performed. The treatment group difference in the distribution of boys and girls randomized was not seen in any of the other data sets that were analyzed for this study.
Ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone treatment (90%) was superior to ofloxacin treatment (78%) for the primary efficacy variable of clinical cure at the TOC visit (P ϭ .0025; Table 2 ). There were significantly fewer treatment failures in patients who were treated with ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone (4%) compared with ofloxacin (14%; P ϭ .0017). There is a significant difference in favor of ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone (4 days) compared with ofloxacin (6 days) in the median time to cessation of otorrhea, indicating earlier resolution of AOMT in patients who were treated with the antibiotic/steroid combination compared with the single agent fluoroquinolone ( Table 2 , Fig  1) . This difference (2 days) in favor of ciprofloxacin/ dexamethasone over ofloxacin is considered to be clinically meaningful because it represents a 33% improvement in clinical response and was obtained using considerably less drug (56 drops compared with 100 drops) for a shorter time (7 days compared with 10 days). The finding is confirmed by data obtained in the physicians' assessment of clinical response at each visit, which showed significantly greater cure rates with ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone at days 3 (P Ͻ .0001), 11 (P Ͻ .0001), and 18 (P ϭ .0023; Table 2 ). Similar findings are also evident for the proportion of patients in whom otorrhea and otic discharge were absent at each visit (Table 2) .
Pretherapy pathogens that were present at the baseline examination are listed in Table 3 . The eradication rates of pretherapy organisms after treatment with ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone or ofloxacin are summarized in Table 4 for bacterial species with 5 or more reported cases. These data show that substantially similar rates for microbiologic success by species are obtained for either treatment. However, we note there are significantly fewer treatment failures reported for ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone compared with ofloxacin therapy. In terms of overall response, treatment with ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone was superior to ofloxacin for microbiologic eradication at the TOC visit (92% and 82%, respectively; P ϭ .0061; Table 2 ). Therefore, microbiologic success favors ciprofloxacin over ofloxacin in treating AOMT infections in pediatric patients.
The safety of ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone and ofloxacin was evaluated in 599 pediatric patients who had AOMT and were randomized to treatment and received study drug. Overall, the adverse-event profiles of ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone and ofloxacin are similar. Ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone or ofloxacin administered twice daily in the affected ears is safe and well tolerated in pediatric patients with AOMT. No serious treatment-related adverse events were reported during the study. Fewer patient discontinuations as a result of adverse events were noted in the ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone group (32 patients) compared with ofloxacin (46 patients).
Adverse events in the overall safety population all were nonserious with the exception of 3 reports unrelated to treatment (abdominal pain, pneumonia, and cellulitis). In general, adverse events were generally mild to moderate, usually resolved with or without treatment, and generally did not interrupt patient continuation in the study. Similar types of related otic and nonotic adverse events were noted in pediatric patients who were treated in both treatment groups (Table 5) . No clinically relevant or statistically significant differences in mean change of speech recognition threshold from baseline or decrease in hearing from baseline were observed after treatment with either ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone or ofloxacin, based on bone and air conduction audiometry.
Both ciprofloxacin and ofloxacin, when used alone as topical otic preparations, are effective for the treat- ment of AOMT in children, with no apparent risk of ototoxicity with either agent. 4, 5, 16, 17 The present study shows that the addition of the corticosteroid dexamethasone to the fluoroquinolone ciprofloxacin achieves superior rates of clinical cure and microbiologic success, results in fewer treatment failures, and provides earlier resolution of AOMT compared with treatment with the single-agent fluoroquinolone ofloxacin. In this regard, the findings confirm our earlier clinical report of ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone versus ciprofloxacin 15 and in experimental animal studies showing that antibiotic/dexamethasone combinations are more effective than antibiotic therapy alone in resolving otorrhea in a primate model of CSOM 14 and in reducing and preventing persistent middle ear mucosal changes in rats with experimental AOM. 20 In the current AOMT study in children aged Ն6 months to 12 years, we show that a 7-day course of ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone (4 drops twice daily, 56 total drops) with less total drug administered is superior to a 10-day course of ofloxacin (5 drops twice daily, 100 total drops) for clinical cure, microbial eradication, and treatment failures. Physicians' assessment of clinical response at each visit showed significantly greater cure rates with ciprofloxacin/ dexamethasone at days 3, 11, and 18 (Table 2 ) compared with the single agent ofloxacin. In addition, ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone treatment results in a clinically significant earlier resolution of AOMT of 2 days. This finding is especially relevant because it provides a substantial advantage to the parent or caregiver of the AOMT patient by allowing an earlier return to normal activities, child care, or school. Economic benefit can be expected from caregivers' being able to return to work earlier.
The data presented in the current study demon- strate that ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone is clinically and microbiologically superior to ofloxacin. A review of the published clinical study of the efficacy of ofloxacin in AOMT patients tends to corroborate this conclusion. In a prospective, randomized, controlled trial comparing topical otic ofloxacin with oral amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium, no difference was noted between the 2 treatments for overall clinical cure or improvement by visit. 16 Clinical cure rate at the TOC visit was 89% for both treatments. Overall clinical/microbiologic eradication was also not significantly different, 77% for ofloxacin and 67% for amoxicillin/clavulanate. 16 Our study results for ofloxacin demonstrated similar outcomes for clinical cure (78%) and microbiologic eradication (82%) compared with 90% and 92%, respectively, for ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone treatment.
Topical ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone treatment is superior to topical ofloxacin in clinical cure and microbiologic eradication, results in fewer treatment failures, provides earlier resolution of AOMT, and gives a significantly better overall therapeutic response. Topical administration of the antibiotic/corticosteroid combination represents a significant clinical advantage over single-agent antibiotic therapy and can be expected to result in important medical and economic benefits. * One patient receiving ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone and 1 patient receiving ofloxacin discontinued from the study as a result of a therapy-related event. † Precipitate ear was described as study drug residue.
http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/113/1/e40 e45
have reported that the incorporation of sodium taurocholate in CCF agar (in place of egg yolk) enhances the recovery of spore forms of C difficile from solid media. We describe the use of cycloserine cefoxitin fructose broth containing 0 1 % sodium taurocholate (CCFT broth) for the isolation of C diffjile from vaginal and faecal specimens.
women attending the Department of Genital Medicine (DGM). Groups IVa and IVb were mothers attending the matemity unit. Predelivery high vaginal swabs were taken by the midwife at onset of labour. Post delivery vaginal swabs were taken just prior to discharge. Group V were the babies delivered to mothers in group IV.
Culture method Swabs were inoculated onto solid media and then discarded. When enrichment cultures were performed (see Table) , a duplicate swab was broken off into the CCFT broth.
Cultures were incubated in an anaerobic cabinet (10% CO2) for 7 days. Plates were examined for typical C difficile colonies after 48 h and seven days. Suspect colonies were subcultured to blood agar for "purity" prior to further tests. 
Five groups of subjects were studied independently (Table) . Groups I-III were unselected consecutive Accepted for publication 23 August 1983 Results and discussion
The results are summarised in the Table. Only on, C difficile isolation was made from 132 high vaginal swabs examined using CCF agar in groups I and II. No positive isolates were obtained using the RCA medium containing p-cresol (group II). However the use of CCFT broth greatly increased the isolation rates from vaginal swabs. In groups III and IVa the isolation rates from broth were 11% and 18% respectively compared with 1-2% and 0% from CCF agar alone. These differences in isolation rates are significant (p < 0-01). In group IVb (post-delivery mothers) CCFT broth was again superior to CCF agar but the total numbers are small and not statistically significant. However, when the overall isolation rates from vaginal specimens are examined for groups II, III and IV combined, the rate of isolation from CCFT 22/177 (12%) is significantly greater than that from CCF agar 3/177 (p < 0.001).
Isolation rates of C difficile in five groups of subjects In contrast to the results obtained with vaginal swabs, the isolation rate obtained using CCFT broth was not significantly different to that obtained using CCF agar. This may be explained by the relatively high counts of C difficile organisms present in many faecal specimens and by the occasional failure of CCFT broth to yield C difficile when overgrowth of "coliform" organisms had taken place in the broth. In conclusion we suggest that a liquid culture medium, such as that described here, is a useful addition to conventional agar culture when only small numbers of C diffirile organisms are likely to be present.
Rapid demonstration of nucleic acids using "oxidised" gallocyanin and chromic potassium sulphate: methods and applications OAN HUSAIN, KC WAiTS Department of Cytopathology, Charing Cross Hospital, London W6 Studies of metallic salt lakes of the oxazine dyes gallamin blue, celestine blue and gallocyanin led to the introduction of techniques for selective staining of Nissl and nuclear substance in nerve cells' and specific nuclear stains2-4 and to the theory of galAccepted for publication 21 September 1983 locyanin chromalum staining and its application for quantitative estimation of basophilia.5
The gallocyanin chromalum technique of Einarson' was reviewed by us for use with the Quantimet image analysing computer6 and has now been adopted as a nuclear stain for the automated interactive cervical cancer screening system CERVIFIP where detection by integrated optical density is utilised, but its use in routine service conditions is limited by the fact that the staining technique requires incubation at 42°C for 16 h.7
We have therefore conducted experiments to reduce the staining time required to a minimum but still retain its degree of stoichiometry and stain density. Our results have also shown that the rapid staining technique is useful for staining cells other than those exfoliated from the cervix, namely 
mTOR is the target of the immunosuppressive drug rapamycin and the central component of a nutrientand hormone-sensitive signaling pathway that regulates cell growth and proliferation. We now appreciate that this pathway becomes deregulated in many human cancers and has an important role in the control of metabolism and aging. We have identified two distinct mTOR-containing proteins complexes, one of which regulates growth through S6K and another that regulates cell survival through Akt. These complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2, define both rapamycin-sensitive and insensitive branches of the mTOR pathway. I will discuss new results from our lab on the regulation and functions of the mTORC1 and mTORC2 pathways. 
VOL. XXXII NO. 10 THE JOURNAL OF ANTIBIOTICS
Sir: Cardiotoxicity and alopecia caused by anthracyclines were examined in an experimental model in which golden hamsters were treated three times a week with i.p. doses equivalent to 3/4 of the optimally oncostatic dosages against murine L1210 leukemia, where they were given at days 1, 5 and 9 after tumor cell inoculation. Each drug was administered to 21 hamsters, and every week 3 animals from each group and 3 control animals were sacrificed. Relevant tissues were quickly removed and immediately processed for examination.
In preceding publications1,2) it was shown, by electron microscopy (EM), that AD32 is less myocardiotoxic than adriamycin (ADM), detorubicin (DTR), daunorubicin (DNR), 4'-epiadriamycin (eADM), adriamycin hydrochloride (ADMh) and rubidazon (RBZ); and that aclacinomycin (ACM) is less cardiotoxic than AD32. By light microscopic (LM) studies of skin, it was also observed that ACM and AD32 preserved the normal histological structures of skin, without causing alopecia, as contrasted with the 6 other anthracyclines which caused marked atrophy of all epidermic layers and loss of hair (alopecia)1,2).
The most recent anthracycline studied by these techniques is THP-ADM, a new Japanese drug3), at a dosage of 4 mg/kg i.p. This communication, briefly reports our findings concerning the EM alterations of the myocardium, the LM lesions of the skin and the mortality of this drug as compared with those of the 8 preceding anthracyclines studied.
Mortality was very high for the animals receiving the first 6 drugs (ADM, DTR, DNR, eADM, ADMh and RBZ), and all animals died before the end of the 4th week of treatment. By contrast, the mortality was very low for animals receiving the other three drugs (ACM, AD32, and THP-ADM). Only one out of 21 ACM and AD32 treated hamsters died during the 4 weeks of treatment, and there were no deaths in the group of THP-ADM treated animals at the end of the 4th week of treatment. As with ACM and AD32 treated animals, all THP-ADM treated hamsters preserved their good general status, without loss of weight and without digestive trouble. All animals treated with the other six anthracyclines (ADM, etc.) showed 30% to 40% weight losses and severe digestive troubles with severe diarrhoea.
At the end of the first and second weeks of treatment, EM examination of the myocardium of both the THP-ADM and the ACM treated hamsters showed very rare and mild lesions. Some myocytes had swelling of the mitochondriae, clearing of their matrices, and lysis of the crests. Generally, mitochondriae, myofilaments and intercalated discs were as well preserved as those in the controls. The myocardium of all animals treated with ADM, DTR, DNR, eADM, ADMh and RBZ showed very severe alterations by EM, viz., swelling of mitochondriae with lysis of their crests, dilation of sarcoplasmic reticulum, separation and lysis of myofilaments with disruption of z-band registry, separation of fascia adherens of intercalated discs, vacuolization of the cytoplasma and formation of myelinic figures. At the end of the first and second weeks of AD32 treatment, lesions in these animals were less marked than those seen in the animals treated with the preceding 6 antibiotics but changes were apparent in the mitochondriae, the myofilaments and intercalated discs.
At the end of the 4th week of treatment, all surviving THP-ADM treated hamsters had very mild and rare EM alterations of their myocardium, with moderate lesions of the mitochondriae, myofilaments and intercalated discs.
Two months after THP-ADM treatment had been terminated, an EM study of the myocardium of sacrificed animals revealed that there was recovery in the myocardial alterations, as was also observed with ACM and AD32 treated hamsters1,2). The myofibrils and mitochondriae were generally as well preserved as those in the controls.
LM studies of the skins of the THP-ADM treated animals showed normal histologic structures of the epidermic layers and hair (without alopecia) as in ACM and AD32 treated animals, even after 4 weeks of treatment. Histopathologic studies of the skins of the animals treated with the six other groups of antibiotics (ADM, etc.) showed degenerative lesions with very marked atrophy of epidermic layers and loss of hair (alopecia). 
: Characterization of the molecular markers surrounding RTN4IP1 in the four families.
(A) Physical map of the chromosome 6 region flanking RTN4IP1. Distances between RTN4IP1 and the markers are indicated above the line. (B) For each marker, the sequence of the forward and reverse primers is provided, together with the minimal and maximal sizes of the amplified fragment, and their position on chromosome 6. (C) Size in nucleotides of the markers in affected persons, parents and wild-type alleles in family I, II and III on the left and family IV on the right. Colocalization of RTN4IP1 with mitochondria in (A) and with the endoplasmic reticulum in (B). NIH3T3 cells transfected by a plasmid expressing RTN4IP1-EYFP fusion protein, were fixed using 4% PFA for 20 min at room temperature and rinsed twice with PBS, then permeabilized using a blocking solution containing 0.1% Triton X-100, 5% donkey serum in PBS. Primary antibodies were in (A) mouse antibodies to ATP synthase (Millipore, MAB3494, dilution 1:1000) and in (B) rabbit polyclonal antibodies to GRP78 (Abcam, ab21685, dilution 1:500), incubated overnight at 4°C and visualized using Alexa594-labeled secondary antibodies at a dilution of 1:1000 (Jackson ImmunoResearch). After 2 hours incubation, cells were rinsed twice with PBS for 10 min and incubated with a Hoechst 33242 solution at 1µg/ml for 5 min. Finally, cells were rinsed once for 10 min and coverslips were mounted using fluorescence Mounting Medium (Dako, S3023). Images were captured with an AxioImager microscope (Zeiss). (C) Mitochondria were isolated from control fibroblasts as described (Wittig, I., Braun, H.P., Schägger, H. (2006) . Blue Native PAGE. Nat. Protoc. 1, 418-428.), and resuspended in mitochondrial buffer (mannitol 210mM, sucrose 70mM, EDTA 1mM and HEPES 10mM pH 7.5) containing (+) or not (-) proteinase K (50µg/ml), without (lanes 1 and 2) or with increasing concentrations of digitonin (lanes 3 to 8: 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 mg/ml) or with 2% Triton X-100 (lane 9, Trit.). After 30 minutes on ice, proteolysis was ended by adding 5mM PMSF and Laemli sample buffer, and heating at 95°C for 15 minutes. Samples (100µg of mitochondrial proteins) were analyzed by Western blotting using monoclonal mouse anti-RTN4IP1 (Abcam, dilution 1:1000), anti-BCL-2 (outer membrane, BD Biosciences, dilution 1:1000), polyclonal rabbit anti-OPA1 (inter membrane space, Abcam, dilution 1:300) and anti-MCU (inner membrane, Abcam, dilution 1:1000) antibodies. The direct proteolysis of RTN4IP1 as that of BCL2, in absence of digitonin treatment suggests that RTN4IP1 is located on the outer membrane, while OPA1 from the inter membrane space, is protected from low concentrations of digitonin, and MCU from the inner membrane is protect from the highest concentrations of digitonin. 
Intussusception is a condition in which a segment of intestine invaginates into another section of intestine. Signs and symptoms of intussusception include acute pain, nausea, lethargy, vomiting and sometimes bleeding from the rectum ("red currant jelly") [1] . Although intussusception generally remits spontaneously, in a number of cases either contrast enema or surgery is needed to treat the disorder [2] . The causes of intussusception include infections and vaccination with rotavirus vaccine, but organic disorders such as malignancy tend to predominate in adults.
Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic inflammatory small intestinal disorder that occurs in about 1-2% of the general population [3, 4] . Undiagnosed CD is characterized by small bowel inflammation [5] and will sometimes cause small bowel wall edema [6] , intestinal lymph node swelling [7] and dysmotility [7] but also ulcers and strictures [8] . It has therefore been suggested that untreated CD may be linked to intussusception; a number of casereports and case series substantiate this hypothesishesis [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] . In a recent paper from a tertiary institution in the US [14] , 3/252 (1.2%) of children with newly diagnosed CD had a history of intussusception compared with 0.07% of the child population attending this center.
This suggests intussusception may be associated with CD, however, due to small numbers or lack of controls, none of these studies have estimated relative risks or odds ratios (ORs) [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] .
The main objective of this study was therefore to examine the association between intussusception and later biopsy-verified CD in a large nationwide populationbased case-control study. In a post-hoc analysis we examined the risk of intussusception in patients who already had a diagnosis of CD.
We identified patients with intussusception through the Swedish Patient Register [15] (data on inpatient care, hospital-based outpatient care and day-care surgery). Intussusception data were linked to data on CD obtained from biopsy reports at Sweden's 28 pathology registers [16] . Linkages were performed using the Swedish personal identity number (PIN) [17] .
Cases with intussusception were identified from the Swedish Patient Register [15] by reference to relevant International Classification of Disease (ICD) codes ICD-7: 570.0; ICD-8: 560.0; ICD-9: 560A; and ICD-10: K56.1. In subanalyses we restricted intussusception to cases with surgery or to those who had radiological intervention (code TJG30 or 4780) for intussusception. In a separate analysis we examined the risk of CD in patients with at least two recorded health care contacts that were due to intussusception.
The Swedish Patient Register started in 1964 and since 1987 the register has nationwide coverage. Day-surgery data were added from 1997 and hospital-based outpatient data since 2001 [15] .
In 2006-2008 we collected small intestinal biopsy report data from all pathology departments (n = 28) in Sweden. The biopsies were performed between 1969 and 2008. IT personnel carried out computerized searches for arrival date of biopsies, PIN [17] , morphology and topography (duodenum and jejunum). CD was defined as having a biopsy with villous atrophy (VA, equals Marsh stage 3) [18] according to the Swedish SnoMed classification. We did not require patients to have a positive antibodies against tissue transglutaminase (TTG), endomysium (EMA), or gliadin for a CD diagnosis, but in a random subset of patients with VA and available data on CD serology about 88% were positive for either of these antibodies at the time of biopsy [16] . An earlier validation of 114 patients with VA found that 108 (95%) had CD [16] . Approximately 79% of individuals with CD had gastrointestinal symptoms before biopsy and 35% had anemia.
Each individual undergoing biopsy was matched with up to five controls for age, sex, calendar period and county of residence. Controls were identified from the Total Population Register by the Swedish government agency, Statistics Sweden and had no previous duodenal/jejunal biopsy.
We then excluded individuals whose biopsy may have originated from the ileum, CD individuals lacking a serial number from Statistics Sweden or having no matched controls since all analyses were carried out per stratum. The remaining individuals were identical to those in our study on mortality in CD [19] . Thus, the final sample on which this study is based was 29,096 individuals with CD and 144,522 matched controls.
We used conditional logistic regression to estimate ORs for CD and earlier intussusception. The conditional approach entails that each individual with CD is only compared with his or her controls within the same stratum. We also present percentages of CD patients and controls with a previous diagnosis of intussusception.
In pre-defined subanalyses we examined intussusception and CD in relation to sex, age (0-19, 20-39, 40-59 and ≥60 years at age of diagnosis) and calendar period (1989, 1990-1999 and 2000-) at CD diagnosis.
In another pre-defined subanalysis we examined the association between intussusception and CD in children aged <2 years (CD: n = 4,589). We did so for two reasons. First, in Sweden, CD is often diagnosed in this age group [20] , and second, as opposed to adults in which intussusception may be caused by cancers [11] , underlying cancers are unusual in childhood when most intussusception is idiopathic. We therefore hypothesized that the association with CD would be strongest with idiopathic intussusception in infancy and childhood. For consistency, we also examined the risk of intussusception in individuals diagnosed with CD ≥2 years of age (CD: n = 24,507). In a post-hoc analysis we excluded all intussusception occurring before the age of 2 years (not equal to the previous analysis in which we examined risk of CD after the age of 2 years but included intussusceptions occurring before age 2) and calculated OR for future CD.
We also examined the risk of future CD in patients with at least 2 health care contacts for intussusception (repeated intussusceptions) of which at least one intussusception had to occur before CD diagnosis. Having at least 2 records of intussusception will increase the likelihood that the patient really had intussusception.
Cancer is sometimes the underlying cause of intussusception [11] and CD has been linked to both lymphoproliferative [21] and gastrointestinal cancer [22] (at least about the time of CD diagnosis [23] ). To rule out that a positive association between CD and intussusception would be due to cancer we performed a separate analysis in which we excluded all individuals (CD patients and controls) who ever had a diagnosis of cancer according to the Swedish Cancer Registry (CD: n = 25,869). The Swedish Cancer Registry began in 1958. About 99% of all cancers are morphologically verified [24] and almost 100% of all cancers are reported to this register each year [24] .
In a post-hoc analysis we examined the risk of future intussusception in patients with CD. This analysis was done to explore whether the null relationship that we found between intussusception and later CD was independent of temporal sequence. In the prospective analysis we used a cohort study design. Individuals with CD were compared with matched reference individuals and followed from biopsy (or matching date) until first event of intussusception, emigration, death or end of followup (Dec 31, 2009), whichever occurred first. We used Cox regression models to calculate hazard ratios (HRs) for the risk of future intussusception in CD. All analyses were internally stratified, i.e. one individual with CD was only compared with his or her matched reference individuals (within a stratum) before a summary estimate for the whole CD population was calculated. This approach eliminates the influence of matching variables, such as sex, age, county of residence and calendar year at CD diagnosis. The prospective cohort analysis was based on 29,060 individuals with no earlier record of intussusception and 144,304 matched reference individuals. SPSS version 20.0 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA) was used for all analyses. Statistical significance was defined as 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for risk estimates (ORs and HRs) not including 1.0.
The study was approved by the regional ethical review board in Stockholm, Sweden. Since none of the participants was contacted and individual information was "anonymized" before the analyses, informed consent was not required by the board.
The median age at CD diagnosis was 30 years (range 0-95) ( Table 1) . Most patients with CD were diagnosed after 1990 since this study was based on computerized biopsy reports and computerized registers were usually introduced in this decade. Data on the sub-cohort of children diagnosed with CD <2 years of age are presented in Additional file 1. Slightly more than 6 of 10 study participants (all ages) were women.
Of 29,096 individuals with CD, 34 (0.12%) had a diagnosis of intussusception vs. 143/144,522 of the controls (0.10%). Hence, we found no association between intussusception and later CD (OR = 1.17; 95% CI = 0.82-1.67). The OR for having a diagnosis of CD was 1.31 (95% CI = 0.64-2.68) within 1 year after intussusception, 0.56 (95% CI = 0.17-1.78) 1-< 5 years after intussusception and 1.31 (95% CI = 0.84-2.05) ≥5 years after intussusception.
The risk of future CD was similar in females (OR = 0.97; 95% CI = 0.57-1.66) and males (OR = 1.40; 95% CI = 0.86-2.28) ( Table 2) , and there were no significant differences in ORs according to age at CD diagnosis or calendar year (Table 2) . Adjustment for education and country of birth (Nordic vs. Non-Nordic) did not affect our ORs (data not shown).
When we restricted our dataset to children <2 years of age (at diagnosis of CD or at date of matching), 6 individuals with CD had a previous intussusception vs. 32 controls. Intussusception was no risk factor for CD in this subset of young children (OR = 0.94; 95% CI = 0.42-2.14) ( Table 3) . Table 3 shows additional data. Similarly, intussusception was no risk factor for having a diagnosis of CD after 2 years of age (OR = 1.24; 95% CI = 0.83-1.86). However, we did find a statistically significant association (OR = 2.11; 95% CI = 1.26-3.53) in a post-hoc analysis that only examined intussusceptions occurring after the age of 2 years and risk of future CD.
Restricting our exposure to intussusception with either radiological intervention or surgery, the OR for future CD was 1.27 (95% CI = 0.60-2.69).
One patient with CD vs. 13 controls had ≥2 records of intussusception (out of which at least one intussusception occurred before CD diagnosis and study entry). This outcome corresponded to a non-significant OR of 0.40 for future CD (95% CI = 0.06-2.99). In eleven of the fourteen (1 + 13) patients with ≥2 records of intussusception, did the two records correspond to the same intussusception (e.g. follow-up visit shortly after first diagnosis). All three patients with ≥30 days between the two intussusceptions (our definition of different episodes), were controls.
Excluding study participants who had a diagnosis of cancer at some stage in life, the OR for future CD in patients with intussusception was 1.10 (95% CI = 0.76-1.59) (31/25,869 CD patients vs. 140/130,041 controls had an earlier diagnosis of intussusception).
Using a prospective cohort approach, a post-hoc analysis found that 12 of 29,060 individuals with CD had a diagnosis of intussusception after CD onset (expected n = 6), corresponding to a hazard ratio and relative risk of 1.95 (95% CI = 1.01-3.77, p = 0.046).
To our knowledge this is the first case-control study examining intussusception and risk of future CD. It found no association between intussusception and CD (overall OR = 1.17). In a post-hoc analysis intended to confirm the null relationship between prior intussusception and CD before diagnosis we instead found that patients with diagnosed CD were at an almost twofold increased risk of later intussusception.
Most literature on CD and intussusception has been limited to case reports or case series [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] 25] . Germann et al. suggest that intussusception in CD has a mild clinical course [25] . Intussusception may take place in the duodenum or jejunum but may occur in other parts of the intestine. In our study we were unable to differentiate between intussusceptions in the small intestine and the colon. If intussusception is associated with CD, it is most likely associated with small intestinal intussusception and thus the inclusion of colonic intussusception may have diluted a positive relationship. Still, the overall OR for future CD was very close to 1.0, and if there had been a significant association between previous intussusception and CD, this would have appeared in our data. Reilly et al. reported that 1.2% of their celiac children had experienced a known intussusception [14] but since the authors do not present any statistical comparison with the general population this may or may not represent an increase. Our study differs from that of Reilly et al. [14] by different source populations (nationwide approach vs. tertiary institution), and larger number of celiac patients (29,096 vs. 254) .
In a recent paper we studied the role of surgery in adult intussusception [11] . In that case series 8/196 (4%) patients with intussusception had CD [11] . In a paper looking at the risk of intussusception in patients with a diagnosis of CD 14/880 (1.6%) developed intussusception during follow-up [13] . In both these series, with strong associations between CD and intussusception, participants were recruited from single tertiary centers, making it is possible that this procedure selected cases with more severe CD and intussusception [11, 13] , or that these patients were at higher risk of undergoing investigation or contacting health care for a number of disorders. We have previously shown that the relative risk of another disorder in CD (tuberculosis) is twice as high in CD patients identified through hospital records [26] as in patients identified through biopsy reports [27] . Further, the risk of mortality in CD seems higher in patients with a hospital record of CD [28] than in patients diagnosed through biopsy reports [19] . More than 96% of pediatricians and gastroenterologists in Sweden perform a biopsy in at least 90% of patients with suspected CD before diagnosis [29] . Other strengths of our paper include the high specificity of VA for CD. When two independent reviewers manually scrutinized more than 1500 biopsy reports, very few individuals had other comorbidities than CD (0.3% of patients with VA had inflammatory bowel disease and 0.2% had Helicobacter pylori). The nationwide ascertainment of CD yielded a large number of CD cases, which contributed to high statistical power. We were therefore able to stratify for age, sex and calendar period at CD diagnosis.
Restricting our analyses to intussusception with radiological intervention and surgery did not affect the OR (1.27). Only after we restricted our analyses to individuals with intussusception after the age of 2 years, did we find a positive association between intussusception and future CD. We urge caution when interpreting these data since they made up a post-hoc finding and could be due to chance. Still, these data may reflect a true association between inflammation from undiagnosed CD in older children and adults and secondary intussusception.
This study has some limitations. We used a case-control design to examine the association between previous intussusception and future CD. This design means that we did not screen individuals with intussusception for serological markers. Still, if any, patients with intussusception would have been more likely to undergo investigation for CD and this would have driven up the OR for CD. The lack of serological data can therefore not explain our null findings for later CD risk.
We did not have access to radiological data such as computed tomography and thus could not confirm the intussusception diagnosis. However, in several analyses we increased the specificity of intussusception through various restrictions of the dataset and this had only marginal effects on the ORs. Nor did we screen CD patients for intussusception with MRI, CT or ultrasound [7] . Thus, we have no information on the association between CD and intussusception that did not require health care.
We know of no earlier incidence study of intussusception in Sweden but a study from nearby Germany found an incidence of 60/100,000 person-years in children <1 year of age [30] . When we examined control children who were born in 1987 or later (when the Swedish Patient Registry was complete) in our dataset, there were 37 intussusceptions in the first year of life corresponding to an incidence of 83/100,000 (37/44,759 person-years). This incidence suggests that the low OR of our study is unlikely to be due to underreporting of intussusceptions.
Finally, despite the large number of patients, we cannot rule out a weak association between intussusception and later CD since the upper 95% CI reached 1.67.
Early versions of Rotavirus immunizations have been linked to intussusception [31] , and we lacked immunization data. However a recent study from Sweden [32] found no association between childhood immunizations and CD, and rotavirus immunizations have not yet been included in the general childhood immunization program in Sweden. Hence, biased immunization coverage in CD children is unlikely to explain our results.
In conclusion, this study found no association between intussusception and CD before CD diagnosis (undiagnosed CD), but did find a twofold increased risk of intussusception after CD diagnosis. However, because only 12/29,060 (0.04%) individuals with CD developed intussusception during follow-up, intussusception is probably a rare complication in CD. This study does not support CD screening in patients with intussusception.
JFL. Wrote the first draft of the paper: JFL. Contributed to the writing of the paper: AN, JAM, OO. Contributed to the study design and interpretation of the data analyses: JFL, AN, JAM, OO. Approved the final version of the manuscript: JFL, AN, JAM, OO. Responsible for data integrity: JFL. Obtained funding: JFL. Guarantor: JFL had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data. JFL takes responsibility for the accuracy of the data analyses. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
The way, time and circumstances in which Bosnia and Herzegovina was recognized as an independent and sovereign state on the one hand, and a highly delicate political situation and ethnic relations on the other, make the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina a highly specific one. In the spring of 1992 Croats and Muslims had neither regular army forces nor organized logistics and rear echelon, thus they were vulnerable to the strong and wellorganized Yugoslav Federal Army (YFA) and many Serbian paramilitary formations. The parliament, government and presidium of the newly formed state of Bosnia and Herzegovina, consisting of Croats, Serbs and Muslims were dissolved and the legislative, executive and judiciary power ceased to exist. The national economy and production were destroyed within a short time. After a few months, about 50% of the territory was controlled by the YFA and Serbian paramilitary forces.
General disintegration of Bosnia and Herzegovina also affected the public health service. In the part controlled by the Cioats and Muslims each medical facility operated independently and managed to remain in function only owing to the enthusiastic efforts of its medical personnel and abundant donations given by numerous individuals and organizations from all parts of the world. Despite such chaos, the public health service system had to be organized in order to provide health care to the population, but also to treat growing numbers of war casualties, both soldiers and civilians. In addition to the lack of organized regular army forces, Croats and Muslims did not have organized military medical care. Therefore, the already existing civilian medical institutions took over the organization of all types of military medical services, including the system of the emergency war surgical care.
The NATO Handbook of Emergency War Surgery (1) served as a basis for the formation and further development of war surgical care system in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, specific circumstances dictated certain modifications of the NATO schemes. Of course, departures from the basic principles of surgical, resuscitation and anaesthetic management could not be made, but some changes in the staged management of the wounded were necessary. Bearing in mind the autonomous operation of each medical institution, the evacuation of the wounded was organised and performed to the best of the abilities of each medical institution and depending upon the war circumstances. It has to be pointed out that within the borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina there was no rear, and consequently no fourth echelon. Owing to the fact that Croatia has and is still, accepting all the wounded from Bosnia and Herzegovina, it has been possible to have the war casualties treated securely in rear medical facilities in Croatia.
We want to present our modification of the third echelon, using the example of the Sturba war hospital near the town of Livno in the southwest part of Bosnia and Herzegovina, fully controlled by Croats and Muslims.
The NATO medical doctrine of echelonment recommends that the surgical care at the level of the third echelon should not comprise complete surgical management but only initial surgical effort to save life and limb, prevent infection and render the casualty transportable to a rear medical facility (l ). We think that this recommendation has been based upon the assumption that in the long and change-prone evacuation chain casualties are cared for by an undefined number of surgeons of various nationalities.
Our opinion is that such a concept of treatment at the level of the third echelon has been designed for powerful and well-organized multinational armies whose possible war operations would be waged in large areas, perhaps in foreign territory, supported with excellent logistics and always secure rear in the home countries.
A well-equipped war hospital was located at Sturba, 5 km away from the town of Livno (2) . When planning the organization of war surgical service system we decided that the evacuation chain of the casualties from the Livno battlefield should end at this hospital, which was at the level of the third echelon of medical care. Contrary to the NATO war doctrine, complete surgical care was given to casualties at this hospital in terms of definitive treatment of acute trauma. In case of severely wounded persons, especially those with life-threatening injuries, surgery, resuscitation and anaesthesia were done simultaneously because we adhered to the principle that surgical intervention was an integral part of resuscitation and that resuscitation without simultaneous complete surgical care would prove unsuccessful. Intensive care was continued during the postoperative course until stabilization of vital functions and the general condition, as well as elimination of early complications. After this, patients were transported to a fourth echelon medical facility, i.e. various hospitals in Croatia, mostly in Split and Zagreb (2) .
Being close to the first front lines and having wellorganized road evacuation, casualties were transported to Sturba shortly after wounding, and those most seriously wounded were operated on within 1 -1.5 hours post injury. It was more than once that we were made aware of the importance of time in salvation of life and limb, as well as prevention of infection. The same conviction was shared by surgical and anaesthesiological teams assigned to auxiliary war hospitals in Croatia (3) (4) (5) (6) . In contrast to this, the reports from the Afghanistan war (7) speak of high rates of various complications, even fatal outcomes, due to delays in delivering adequate surgical care. Therefore, the proverb "Time is money" could be paraphrased as "Time is life".
Following the mentioned principles, we treated a total of 597 patients at the Sturba war hospital and performed 1,014 minor surgical procedures (treatment of large nonpenetrating wounds with extensive soft tissue destruction, including injuries of muscles, tendons, small bones of the hand and foot) and 314 various major and complex surgical procedures (2) . Wound debridement was performed in accordance with the NATO handbook instructions and findings of Fackler (8) and Ryan (9), based upon ballistic studies. When having doubts about sparing or radical excision, we chose a radical one.
We believe that this method of work decreased the intraoperative and postoperative mortality rates to zero. Medicamentous therapy also played a significant role and cases of anaerobic or severe aerobic infections or sepsis were not recorded (2) .
The exception were casualties with isolated severe craniocerebral injuries. Following initial surgical care and resuscitation they were immediately transferred to Split. This city in Croatia was the fourth echelon and our rear, as well as the last resort for all the war casualties from the central and southwest parts of Bosnia and the west part of Herzegovina.
Our work at the Sturba war hospital was put to an end 16 months ago. Treatment, including secondary reconstructive surgery and rehabilitation, were completed in almost all of the patients. Due to the spread of war in Bosnia: and Herzegovina, we were not able to summon all patients for a detailed follow-up examination. Some of them presented for the control check-up, and for rather a large number of them we have data available from our fellow-physicians who finished their treatment or were in the process of bringing it to an end. In these two groups of followed-up patients quite good end results were obtained. Some of the patients were lost completely for the follow-up. We learned that some went back to their combat units and were injured or killed during the last year.
We were forced to adapt the NATO war doctrine of echelonment in accordance with special circumstances of the war waged against Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina. The NATO organizational scheme was suitable for the treatment of war casualties in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we strongly recommend it as a basic model which can be further developed in accordance with local conditions and potentials in a defence war.
In addition to the recommended organization at the level of the third echelon of medical care, special attention should be paid to the second echelon (1, 2) . It is an important link in the chain of evacuation and our opinion was that it should be staffed by young physicians trained during graduate and postgraduate studies in the treatment of medical-surgical emergencies. There are not enough surgeons and anaethesiologists in Bosnia and Herzegovina that can be appointed to the third echelon, let alone the s~cond. Therefore, it is not possible to form mobile surgical teams, except in special cases such as aid given to the encircled hospitals in Sarajevo, Nova Bila, Zepce, etc (10) .
The destiny of war casualties, except for those having fatal injuries, depends upon the quality and promptness of first aid and complete surgical treatment and resuscitation. If the first two echelons fulfill their tasks properly and the wounded are treated in terms of complete surgical group.bmj.com on October 11, 2017 -Published by http://jramc.bmj.com/ Downloaded from treatment and resuscitation within the shortest possible period, preferably within one to two hours, they are given the best chance for quoad vitam et quoad sanationem.
Non-invasive urine tests for the early detection or postsurgical surveillance of bladder cancer (BCa) are highly desirable for both the patient and the healthcare system. Currently, voided urinary cytology (VUC) is the most widely used non-invasive urine test, with reported specificities ranging from 85-100% and sensitivities ranging from 13-75% [1, 2] . Two single-protein biomarker urinebased assays, bladder tumor antigen (BTA) test and nuclear matrix protein-22 (NMP-22) test, have been developed and FDA approved for use in this context. However, these assays have significant limitations. The BTA tests (BTA stat™ and BTA TRAK™ (Polymedco Inc. Cortlandt Manor, NY, USA) have diagnostic sensitivities ranging from 29-83% and specificities ranging from 56-86% [3, 4] . In addition, we and others have demonstrated in an experimental model that hematuria adversely affects the accuracy of the BTA assay [5, 6] . The NMP-22 tests (NMP22® Bladder Cancer ELISA Test Kit and the NMP22® BladderChek® point-of-care test, Alere Scarborough, Inc. Waltham, MA) have diagnostic sensitivities ranging from 47-100% and specificities ranging from 55-98% [7, 8] . Atsu et al. and others have recently demonstrated in an experimental model that NMP-22 assays measure the cellularity or amount of cell turnover that may be introduced into the urine by a variety of conditions, including hematuria, infection and instrumentation [9, 10] . Thus, the search for more accurate urine-based biomarkers continues.
Through genomic and proteomic profiling of urine components, we have previously identified a panel of biomarkers that can outperform current urine-based biomarkers for the non-invasive detection of BCa [11] [12] [13] [14] . In a case-controlled validation study, the urinary concentrations of our panel of 14 biomarkers (IL-8, MMP-9, MMP-10, SDC1, CCL18, PAI-1, CD44, VEGF, ANG, CA9, A1AT, SPP1, PTX3, and APOE) were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in voided urines from 127 patients (64 tumor bearing subjects) [15] [16] [17] [18] . Of these 14 biomarkers, two biomarkers (CCL18 and A1AT) had high correlation coefficients (Spearman correlation coefficient >0.76) with urinary blood content and therefore, rather than measuring a valid tumor antigen the biomarker may be merely a surrogate for hematuria. Subsequently, these two biomarkers have been excluded from ongoing multiplex studies [19] until we can clarify the source of these protein biomarkers. Herein, we report the urinary concentrations of CCL18 and A1AT in an independent larger case-control study, and illustrate in an experimental model the influence of cellular proteins and whole blood on the performance of these potential urine-based biomarkers.

Under Institutional Review Board approval by the committees at MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando and Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, written informed consent was obtained prior to collection and storage of biological specimens (voided urine samples and blood) in genitourinary biorepositories. Furthermore under Institutional Review Board approval by the committee at MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando with a waiver of written informed consent, archived bladder tissues from the Department of Pathology at Orlando Health was identified for immunohistochemical analysis. The above review boards monitored study recruitment and study compliance.
For the urinary ELISA validation study, 308 nonconsecutive subjects (102 with BCa) from MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando and Hospital Clínic of Barcelona were available for analysis. The control cohort consisted of 206 individuals (47 with voiding symptoms, 44 with urolithiasis, 9 with gross hematuria, 14 with urinary tract infection and 92 without any diagnosed condition). Patients with a history of renal dysfunction were excluded. The cohort of 308 subjects served as our phase II (validation study) according to the International Consensus Panel on Bladder Tumor Markers and findings were reported according to the STARD criteria [20] . For the experimental model, three healthy volunteers (2 males, 1 female, mean age 36 years) provided urine and blood samples. For the immunohistochemical study, formalin-fixed paraffin embedded blocks containing 165 bladder tumor tissue specimens and 8 benign tissue specimens were retrieved from the Orlando Health Department of Pathology.
Fifty milliliters of voided urine from each subject was assigned a unique identifying number before delivery to the laboratory for processing. Each urine sample was centrifuged at 1000 × g 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was decanted and aliquoted, and the urinary pellet was snap frozen. Both the supernatant and pellet were stored at -80°C prior to analysis. Urine supernatant protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660-nm Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Patients with significant proteinuria were excluded.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for urinary CCL18 and A1AT
The levels of human CCL18 (Cat # ab100620, Abcam, Cambridge, MA) and human A1AT (Cat# ab108799, Abcam) in urine samples were monitored using ELISA. The assays were conducted according to the manufacturer's instructions. Laboratory personnel were blinded to final diagnosis. Calibration curves were prepared using purified standards for each protein assessed. Curve fitting was accomplished by either linear or four-parameter logistic regression following manufacturer's instructions. Urinary creatinine levels were monitored with a commercial ELISA assay (Cat# KGE005 R&D Systems Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) as previously described [21] .
Human bladder cancer cell lines T24 (ATCC, Manassas, VA) and UM-UC-14 (a generous gift from Dr. H. Bart Grossman, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX) [22] were available for analysis. The benign human bladder cell line, UROtsa, was a generous gift from Dr. Donald Sens at the University of North Dakota School Of Medicine (Grand Forks, ND) [23] . T24 and UM-UC-14 cell lines were maintained in RPMI 1640 media. UROtsa cells were maintained in McCoy's 5A medium (Life Technologies, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD). All media were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units/ml of penicillin and 100 μg/ml of streptomycin. All cells were incubated at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO 2 .
The experimental model was essentially as previously published [6, 10] . Figure 1 illustrates the experimental model components and dilutions. Briefly, 10 milliliters of whole blood in heparinized tube and 200 ml of freshly voided urine samples in sterile containers were obtained from three healthy controls. The urine samples from the three healthy subjects were pooled, mixed and distributed into 10 ml aliquots in 15 6 cells from each cell line were lysed with RIPA buffer (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and total protein concentration measured. The total protein extracted from 1×10 6 cells of UROtsa, T24 and UM-UC-14 were 431 μg, 471 μg, 280 μg and 420 μg, respectively, with a mean total protein extract of 400 μg. In the spiking experiments, 4 μg, 40 μg and 400 μg of cellular proteins from either UROtsa or the pooled BCa cell lines were used, corresponding tõ 1×10 4 cells (low concentration),~1×10 5 cells (medium concentration) and~1×10 6 cells (high concentration).
UROtsa lysates and pooled cancer cell lysates were added to pooled urine samples in triplicate. To monitor the influence of hematuria, pooled whole blood from three healthy subjects was added in triplicate to 10 ml of pooled urine samples in the following amounts; 1 μl, 1/ 10000 final dilution; 5 μl, 1/2000 final dilution; 20 μl, 1/ 500 final dilution; 50 μl, 1/200 final dilution and zero control. The number of red blood cells (RBC) in each urine sample was determined by microscopic examination before and after adding whole blood. Standard urinalysis was performed with MULTISTIX PRO Reagent Strips (Bayer HealthCare, Elkhart, IN).
A total of 173 paraffin blocks were verified histologically by H&E staining. For immunochemical staining, blocks were cut in 5 μm sections and placed on a Superfrost Plus Miscroslide. Sections were deparaffinized, followed by antigen retrieval using citric acid buffer (pH 6.0, 95°C for 20 min). The slides were treated with 1% hydrogen peroxide in methanol to block endogenous peroxidase activity. After 20 min blocking in 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA), the slides were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-human CCL18 antibody (MAB394; mouse monoclonal, dilution 1/500 in 1% BSA) from R&D Systems Inc., or anti-human A1AT antibody (NBP1-90309; rabbit polyclonal, dilution 1/2500 in 1% BSA) from Novus Biologicals Inc. (Littleton, CO). Next, the slides were incubated with 2 μg/mL of biotinylated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, the sections were stained using Standard Ultra-Sensitive ABC Peroxidase Staining kit (Pierce/Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and 3, 3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB; Vector Laboratories), counterstained by hematoxylin, dehydrated, and mounted with a cover slide. Human liver, known to stain strongly for CCL18 and A1AT, was used as a positive control, and negative controls were performed by omitting the primary antibodies. Using light microscopy, two investigators (MM and AL) interpreted immunostaining results blinded to specimen and patient data. A third investigator (CJR) reviewed discrepancies and rendered a final score. The location of immunoreactivity (e.g., nuclear, cytoplasm, cell membrane, and stroma) was noted. CCL18 immunostaining was positive only in inflammatory cells in the stroma. Three randomly chosen high power fields (1 HPF = 0.237 mm 2 ) were analyzed for CCL18-positive cells in the stromal area and averaged in each case. A1AT immunostaining was positive only in the cytoplasm of epithelial cells. Immunostaining intensity was reported as weak, moderate or strong.
The Wilcoxon rank sum test was used on ELISA data to determine the association between urinary CCL18, Figure 1 Schematic of the experimental model. Low concentration (1×10 4 ), medium concentration (1×10 5 ) and high concentrations (1×10 6 ) of intact UROtsa benign human bladder cells, or a mixture of human bladder cancer lines, T24 and UM-UC-14 were added to 10 ml of pooled urine from three healthy controls. Low protein concentration of cellular lysate (4 μg), medium concentration (40 μg) and high concentrations (400 μg) of UROtsa benign human bladder cells, or from a mixture of human bladder cancer lines, T24 and UM-UC-14 were added to 10 ml of pooled urine from three healthy controls. Whole blood (1, 5, 20 and 50 μl) was also added to 10 ml of pooled urine from healthy controls.
A1AT and BCa status. Nonparametric receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were plotted and the ability of the biomarker to predict the presence of BCa was estimated by calculating the area under the ROC curves (AUROC). The sensitivity and specificity of the biomarker at the optimal cutoff value was defined by calculating the Youden index [24] . Comparison of immunohistochemical distribution data was performed using Chi square test. Spearman rank correlation coefficients were used to examine the correlation between urinary CCL18 and A1AT concentrations and urinary hemoglobin concentration. The association between CCL18 and A1AT levels and BCa was tested using the Mann Whitney test. Statistical significance in this study was set at p < 0.05 and all reported p values were 2-sided. All analyses were performed using PRISM software version 5.00 (San Diego, CA). Table 1 depicts demographics and clinical characteristics of the study cohorts. Ninety percent of the BCa subjects sampled were Caucasian (median age 69 years) with 60% noted to have non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) and 37% with low-grade disease. In the cancer cohort, urinary cytology achieved a diagnostic sensitivity of 39%. Median urinary protein concentrations of CCL18 (52.84 pg/ml vs. 11.13 pg/ml, p < 0.0001) and A1AT (606.4 ng/ml vs. 120 ng/ml, p < 0.0001) were significantly elevated in BCa subjects compared to controls. Furthermore, median urinary CCL18 was significantly elevated in muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) compared to NMIBC (90.65 pg/ml vs. 44.72 pg/ml, p = 0.044), and approached significance (Figure 2a ) in high-grade compared to low-grade disease (79.57 pg/ml vs. 38.10 pg/ml, p = 0.073). Similarly, median urinary A1AT was significantly elevated in MIBC compared to NMIBC (978.1 ng/ml vs. 414.5 ng/ml, p = 0.0042) and approached significance (Figure 2b ) in high-grade compared to low-grade (917.8 ng/ml vs. 414.5 ng/ml, p = 0.073). The ability of the tested biomarkers to predict the presence of BCa was analyzed using nonparametric ROC analyses, according to National Cancer Institute guidelines [25] . Based on the AUROC, we determined Youden index cutoff values to maximize the sum of sensitivity and specificity. Urinary CCL18 had an area under the curve of 0.768 (95% CI: 0.713-0.824) (Figure 3) , achieved a sensitivity of 70.4%, specificity of 67.7%, positive predictive value of 53.1% and a negative predictive value of 81.5%. Urinary A1AT had an area under the curve of 0.775 (95% CI: 0.721-0.829) (Figure 3) , achieved a sensitivity of 70.6%, specificity of 71.8%, positive predictive value of 55.4% and negative predictive value of 83.2%.


Urine and blood samples were obtained from three healthy volunteer controls for analysis in the experimental model. There was no evidence of gross hematuria, urinary tract infection or any biochemical abnormalities in any volunteer urine samples. Both urinary dipstick and urinary microscopy were negative for hematuria, however, urinary hemoglobin measured by ELISA assay revealed trace amounts in all samples (3.63 ± 0.59 ng/ ml). In these healthy controls, the mean urinary CCL18 level was 5.96 ± 7.73 pg/ml, and the mean urinary A1AT level was 1170 ± 71.94 ng/ml (Table 2) . Urine samples were pooled, and whole cells or cell lysates of the cancer cell line pool and UROtsa cells were added to the urine sample (as depicted in Figure 1 ) and re-analyzed for CCL18 and A1AT using ELISA. The addition of a high concentration (400 μg) of protein lysate from UROtsa cells, or medium to high concentration (40 μg to 400 μg) of protein lysate from pooled cancerous cells resulted in a significant increase in test sample CCL18 (Additional file 1). Furthermore, the addition of whole blood (50 μL) resulted in a significant increase in CCL18 (p < 0.05) ( Figure 4) . As for A1AT, the addition of high concentration of whole blood (50 μL) resulted in a significant increase in test sample A1AT levels (p < 0.05) (Figure 4) .
With the addition of only 1 μl of whole blood to 10 mL of test urines (1/10,000 dilution), the mean urinary hemoglobin level was 174.28 ± 15.69 ng/ml, and microscopy revealed a median 1 RBC/hpf. This level would be termed 'Negative' or 'Trace' in clinical tests such as the Multistix Pro dipstick test (negative blood is <100ng/ml). At this level, CCL18 and A1AT concentrations were unaffected at 7.06 ± 7.78 ng/ml and 1227.31 ± 1.22 ng/ml, respectively. With the addition of 50 μl of whole blood to 10 mL of urine, all urines had visibly gross hematuria, the mean urinary hemoglobin level was 7,898.05 ± 184.67 ng/ ml and median of 17 RBC/hpf was noted. At this level, CCL18 concentration was raised to 31.90 ± 43.19 ng/ml (~4.5 fold increase), but the A1AT concentration was similar to controls at 1,273.16 ± 5.53 ng/ml ( Table 2) . As the concentration of whole blood added to the urine samples increased, the mean urinary hemoglobin level, the extent of hematuria assessed by microscopy, and the mean urinary concentrations of CCL18 and A1AT increased accordingly (Table 2 ). There were high correlation coefficients between hemoglobin and CCL18 (Spearman correlation coefficient = 0.90) and hemoglobin and A1AT (Spearman correlation coefficient = 1.00).
The study cohort consisted of 8 subjects without cancer and 165 non-consecutive subjects with BCa (37 subjects with low-grade BCa and 128 subjects with high-grade BCa, 45 subjects with NMIBC and 120 MIBC). Immunohistochemical staining patterns for CCL18 and A1AT were assessed in both malignant and normal bladder tissue. No epithelial staining was evident for CCL18, however, inflammatory cells in the stromal were positive.
The number of CCL18-positive inflammatory cells per high power field was not increased in bladder tumors compared to controls (1.0 ± 1.2 vs. 4.5 ± 6.9, p = 0.57). In addition, an increase in CCL18-positive inflammatory cells was not associated with higher grade or higher stage disease (Figure 5a ). Immunostaining for A1AT revealed a predominantly epithelial and cytoplasmic localization. Intensity of staining ranged from weak and focal to strong and diffuse. No difference in staining intensity was seen between benign and cancer (p = 0.99). Staining intensity increased with an increase in tumor grade (p = 0.05), however, staining pattern was not significantly associated with tumor stage (p = 0.79) (Figure 5b ).
We have previously identified CCL18 and A1AT as potential biomarkers for the detection of BCa in voided urine samples [15, 18] . CCL18 is a member of the serumbased cytokine family of secreted proteins involved in immunoregulatory and inflammatory processes. CCL18 is thought to promote the invasiveness of cancer cells by triggering integrin clustering and enhancing their adherence to the extracellular matrix, and a receptor (PITPNM3) for this cytokine has been recently identified [26] . CCL18 has been identified in gynecological tumors Figure 3 Diagnostic performance of urinary CCL18 and A1AT. Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves were calculated from the analysis of urine samples obtained from a cohort of 308 subjects (102 with confirmed bladder cancer) for CCL18 and A1AT. AUROC, area under the ROC curve. but not urologic tumors [27, 28] . A1AT, also known as SERPINA1, is a member of a family of serine proteases inhibitors. Specifically A1AT irreversibly inhibits trypsin, chymotrypsin and plasminogen activator. Serpins are known to have diverse but critical roles in the cell, including regulation of homeostasis, cellular survival and blood clotting [29] . Within the oncology literature, reports describe genetic aberrations in cancers, elevated levels in the sera of cancer patients, and survival disadvantage in tumors expressing A1AT [30, 31] .
In our early studies, we noted that these biomarkers had a relatively high correlation (Spearman correlation coefficient > 0.76) with urinary hemoglobin. Given the confounding effects of hematuria that we and others have described for the urine-based BCa detection assays BTA and NMP-22 [6, 10] , we set out to more methodically analyze the association of CCL18 and A1AT with BCa by analyzing cohorts of urine and tissue samples. In this study, ELISA analysis of urine samples from a cohort of 308 subjects confirmed our previous findings [19] that both CCL18 and A1AT are significantly elevated in the urines of subjects with BCa.
To investigate the potential influence of hematuria and other factors on the performance of these biomarkers we employed an experimental model. Although the model does not mimic the actual physiological situation exactly, it does enable the identification of potential sources of specific analytes and to what extent incursion of blood components into the urine may influence the data. We previously used a similar model approach to demonstrate that BTA urine tests primarily detect a serum-based protein [6] , and that NMP-22 urine tests monitor cellular turnover, rather a specific bladder tumor antigen [10] .
Analyses from the model and the ELISA assays revealed different characteristics for CCL18 and A1AT with respect to them being potentially reliable BCa diagnostic biomarkers. For CCL18, the first observation is that three healthy control samples had very low urinary CCL18 levels (5.96 pg/ml). The median level of CCL18 in the non-cancer samples from the 308 subject cohort was also very low (23.4 pg/ml). A low baseline level is an advantage that can enable a clear distinction between healthy and disease state for a given assay. Conversely, if the differential between urine and blood is large, then a small amount of hematuria may have a significant impact. In the spiking experiment, we observed that 50 μl of blood in 10 ml of urine, a level that would be termed 'gross hematuria' in clinical tests, raised the CCL18 level in healthy controls to 31.9 pg/ml, an increase of~5.3 fold. In the 308 subject cohort, the median level of CCL18 was 10-fold higher in BCa subjects (230.5 pg/ml vs. 23.4 pg/ml). The addition of benign and tumor cell lysates to the urine sample is designed to indicate whether the release of ubiquitous cellular factors may be the source of the biomarker. Increased cellular turnover is to be expected in a malignant condition, and so such factors, for example NMP22, may increase even though they are not actually cancer-specific biomarkers. Due to the low levels of CCL18 in the healthy urine samples, the addition of cell lysates from benign and tumor cells did significantly impact the CCL18 levels. Finally, immunohistochemical analysis of bladder tumor tissues revealed that CCL18 was present only in the inflammatory cells located in the stroma. No difference in the number of the immunoreactive cells was observed in benign versus cancerous tissue, or among the various grades or stages of bladder cancer. Together, these findings suggest that CCL18 monitoring is unlikely to be a reliable biomarker for the non-invasive detection of BCa.
The analysis of the A1AT biomarker revealed opposite characteristics for the most part. ELISA data and the experimental model confirmed that A1AT is present at high levels in healthy and non-cancer subject urine samples. The median level in the 308 subject cohort was 120 ng/ml in non-cancer cases, rising 5.5-fold to 606.4 ng/ml in subjects with confirmed BCa. The median level in the three healthy volunteer samples was intermediate (1,170 ng/ml). Lower levels in the non-cancer subjects from the ELISA data is most likely due to degradation with freezing and storage in these samples compared to the fresh urines obtained from the volunteers. The high baseline level of A1AT in healthy urine samples may not be ideal for diagnostic evaluation, but the impact of hematuria on A1AT assays would be expected to be less pronounced. Accordingly, gross hematuria in the Figure 4 Analysis of CCL18 and A1AT biomarker performance in an experimental model. Using the experimental model depicted in Figure 1 , urinary levels of CCL18 and A1AT were analyzed by ELISA. The addition of whole blood resulted in an increase in CCL18 as well as an increase in A1AT. Error bars indicate standard deviations. *, significance (p < 0.05) compared to pooled urines from healthy subjects.^, significance (p < 0.05) compared to corresponding lower concentration.
experimental model (50 μl of blood into 10 ml of urine) raised A1AT to 1,273 ng/ml, an increase of only 9%. Compare this to the >400% rise in CCL18 in the same experimental model conditions. The addition of benign or cancer cell lysates in the experimental model had no impact on the A1AT levels. Previous preliminary research has linked the presence of urinary A1AT as a biomarker for renal dysfunction [32] . However we took precautions in our study to minimize renal dysfunction as a confounder by excluding subjects with a history of renal dysfunction as well as exclude subjects with grossly elevated urinary protein levels. Recently, researchers have reported that impaired renal function (i.e., reduced glomerular filtration rate) may adversely affect urinary Figure 5 Assessment of CCL18 and A1AT in bladder tissue. a) Representative immunostaining of benign bladder for CCL18 (top-left), lowgrade non-muscle invasive bladder cancer for CCL18 (top-middle), and high-grade muscle invasive bladder cancer for CCL18 (top-right). Red arrows indicate CCL18-positive cells in the stroma. CCL18 staining was present only in inflammatory cells associated with the stroma. Lower panels are boxplots of CCL18 immunohistochemical staining intensity of benign bladder vs. bladder cancer, low-grade vs. high-grade, non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) vs. muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC). Error bars indicate standard deviations. Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to assess significance. b) Representative immunostaining of benign bladder for A1AT (top-left), low-grade non-muscle invasive BCa for A1AT (top-middle), and high-grade muscle invasive BCa for A1AT (top-right). A1AT staining was present in the cytoplasm and stroma. A1AT staining varied from weak and focal to strong and diffuse. Lower panel shows column bar graphs of A1AT immunohistochemical staining intensity of benign bladder vs. bladder cancer, low-grade vs. high-grade, NMIBC vs. MIBC.
biomarkers performance [33, 34] . This is an excellent point and should be taken into consideration in future studies. However, we must stress that we confirmed these A1AT ELISA results by performing immunohistochemistry and thus demonstrated that A1AT is present within urothelial cells. We reported A1AT reactivity was epithelial in normal bladder tissue, and strongly positive in all tumor cells, specifically high-grade cells. Although A1AT IHC may not be particularly useful in differential histological evaluations, it does suggest that the source of the increased A1AT observed in BCa samples is most likely bladder tumor cells. The release into the urine may be via secretion or the turnover of tumor cells at the urine interface. Thus, even though normal urinary levels of A1AT are relatively high, measurement of this biomarker in the context of cancer detection may be worthwhile. The good separation between non-cancer and BCa urinary levels and the limited influence by secondary sources suggest that valid diagnostic cutoff thresholds may be possible for urinary A1AT monitoring.
When novel urinary biomarkers are proposed, the investigation of reliability in the face of potentially confounding effects is warranted, especially those introduced into the urine through bleeding, a common presenting factor in bladder tumor-bearing patients. Further studies into the utility of A1AT as a biomarker for the non-invasive detection of BCa are currently underway.
Dysferlin and Caveolin-3 (muscle-specific caveolin, Cav3) are sarcolemmal proteins whose role in muscle has gained clinical attention because mutations in their genes are associated with a number of muscle pathologies. Patients with mutations in the dysferlin (DYSF) gene develop disorders such as limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2B, miyoshi myopathy, and distal myopathy (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) . Whereas disruption in the Caveolin-3 (CAV3) gene has been linked to limb girdle muscular dystrophy 1C, Rippling muscle diseases, hyperCKemia, and distal myopathy among other myopathies (6 -15) . Dysferlin and Cav3 have been co-purified from muscle cells (16, 17) and shown to localize to adjacent membrane domains at the surface in mature muscle fibers (18) . Moreover, dysferlin is depleted from the plasma membrane (PM) 2 when Cav3 is mutated (8, 9, 14, 17, 19) . We have recently demonstrated a role for caveolin in dysferlin localization at the PM (18) . However, the interplay of dysferlin and caveolin membrane trafficking dynamics remains to be examined.
Dysferlin belongs to the ferlin family of proteins comprising otoferlin, myoferlin, and fer1L3 (20 -22) . The DYSF gene encodes a 230-kDa skeletal muscle membrane protein (2, 5, 23) with homology to the Caenorhabditis elegans sperm-vesicle fusion factor, fer-1 (2) . Because of this dysferlin has been suggested to play a role in vesicle fusion in skeletal muscle (2, 24) . Moreover, in the absence of dysferlin muscle cells show defective resealing of membrane disruptions (25) . Dysferlin has a single transmembrane domain at the C terminus and a long N-terminal cytoplasmic region containing six C2 domains. C2 domains are a common feature of the synaptotagmin family of proteins implicated in vesicular traffic and membrane fusion events through calcium-dependent interactions with phospholipids and proteins (26 -29) . Interestingly, dysferlin and synaptotagmins share structural similarities (20, 24) further implicating dysferlin in membrane trafficking processes.
In mammalian cells, the CAV gene family consists of three isoforms: Caveolin-1, -2, and -3 (30 -35) , which are crucial structural components of caveolar membranes (ϳ65 nm, uncoated flask-shaped PM pits). Caveolins are 21-24-kDa integral membrane proteins, Caveolin-1 (Cav1) and -2 (Cav2) are mainly co-expressed in non-muscle cells, whereas Cav3 is largely expressed in skeletal and cardiac muscle but is also found in some smooth muscle (36, 37) . Caveolins are cholesterol-and fatty acid-binding proteins, and are thought to play a role in vesicular traffic and signal transduction events (38 -42) . The protein structure of caveolins is characterized by a hairpin loop topology with a hydrophobic region immersed in the lipid bilayer (the intramembrane domain), and both N and C terminus regions facing the cytoplasm (43) (44) (45) . Additionally, the conserved juxtamembrane region, the caveolin scaffolding * This work was supported by grants from the National Health and Medical domain (CSD), has been shown to bind in vitro to a consensus sequence (XXXXXXX, aromatic residues, X any amino acid) (46) present in various proteins. Dysferlin has several putative CSD binding motifs (17) .
We have recently described the subcellular distribution of dysferlin with respect to Cav3 and showed that dysferlin association with the PM is impaired in the absence of caveolin, or in the presence of dystrophy-associated mutant forms of Cav3 (18) . Although Cav3 and dysferlin copurify (16, 17) , the precise interacting domains and roles in their trafficking dynamics are poorly understood. We show here that in the absence of caveolin, dysferlin reaches the PM but is rapidly endocytosed through a caveolin-, clathrin-, and dynamin-independent pathway. Wild type caveolin, but not mutant forms of caveolin associated with muscle disease, specifically inhibit dysferlin endocytosis causing its retention at the cell surface.
DNA Constructs, Reagents, and Antibodies-Cell culture reagents were obtained from Invitrogen. The antibodies used were: mouse anti-LBPA, mouse anti-LAMP-1 (Southern Biotech), mouse anti-GM130 (BD Biosciences), rabbit antibody made against the conserved region of Cav3 (47), rabbit anti-HA (Dr. T. Nilsson, Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden), rabbit anti-GFP (48), mouse anti-myc 9B11 (Cell Signaling Technology), and anti-protein-disulfide isomerase. Secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488, 350, 546, 647, and CTB conjugated to Alexa Fluor 555 and Tf-Alexa Fluor 647 (Molecular Probes), CY3-conjugated anti-mouse antibody (Jackson Immunoresearch), and HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (Zymed Laboratories) were used. SuperSignal substrate was obtained from Pierce Chemical Company. All other chemicals and reagents were obtained from Sigma.
GFP-dysferlin cDNA was used as a template to generate different truncation mutants by restriction digestion at unique enzymatic sites (49) (see Fig. 1 ), GFP⌬-C2 (GFP-TM), GFP⌬-1 (GFP3ЈGFP-2), GFP⌬-2 (GFP-Tth), GFP⌬-3 (GFP-Xho), and GFP-⌬-TM. Expression of the complete fusion proteins was confirmed in multiple cell lines. Cav3G55S-HA, Cav3C71W-HA, and Flotillin-HA were made as described (50, 51) . The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-GFP, Cav1⌬81-100-HA, and transferrin receptor constructs were gifts from C. Zurzolo (Institut Pasteur, France), D. Brown (State University of New York), S. L. Schmid (Scripps Research Institute), and V. Gerke (Center for Molecular Biology of Inflammation, ZMBE), respectively. Dynamin inhibitor, dynasore, was a kind gift from T. Kirchhausen (Harvard Medical School).
Cell Culture and Transfection-We utilized immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) cell lines derived from Cav1 WT or knock-out mice as in previous studies (18, 52, 53) . Cells were grown on glass coverslips and cDNAs were transiently expressed utilizing Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's directions.
Immunofluorescence and Microscopy-Immunolabeling of MEFs were carried out as described previously (18) . Confocal images were acquired with an inverted Zeiss LSM 510 META microscope system (Axiovert 200M, Carl Zeiss MicroImaging) under a Plan apochromatic ϫ63 1.4 NA oil immersion objective. Images were processed and merged using Adobe Photoshop 9.0 software. Identical imaging and processing parameters were used for all figures.
Surface Labeling and Single Cell Fluorescence QuantificationSurface labeling and quantification of the fluorescence intensity of dysferlin pool at the PM was performed as described previously (18) . The average pixel intensity for PM and IC/Golgi pools were measured using Adobe Photoshop 9.0 software. Experiments were repeated three times.
Quantifications shown in Figs. 1D, 2C, 3B, and 7B are representative of 3 individual experiments and were performed once on 250 -350 cells and twice on a total of 30 cells for each construct. Subcellular phenotypes were determined based on colabeling with relevant IC markers. Results are presented as percentage of cells showing a common phenotype.
Myc, Tfn, CTB, and GPI Uptake Assays-Uptake assays were performed as described previously (54) . In brief, 20 mg/ml monoclonal anti-myc antibody, 1 mg/ml CTxB-Alexa Fluor 555, or 5 mg/ml Tfn Alexa Fluor 647 was bound to cells on ice for 30 min in CO 2 -independent medium. Cells were washed with ice-cold CO 2 -independent medium to remove unbound reagent prior to uptake in growth media (10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM L-glutamine/Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium) at 37°C, for the times indicated. Cells were placed on ice-cold CO 2 -independent medium and washed 2 times for 30 s in 0.5 M glycine (pH 2.2). The cells were fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde and processed for immunofluorescence. For inhibition of dynamin-dependent uptake, cells were preincubated in either 80 mM dynasore/growth media or 0.4% Me 2 SO/growth media for 30 min at 37°C, followed by Tfn and anti-myc uptake in the presence or absence of dynasore.
Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs-WT Cav1 or Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs were transfected with GFPDysf. After overnight incubation, to allow expression of the constructs, the cells were incubated with mouse anti-myc antibodies at 4°C for 20 min, washed, and further incubated with anti-mouse HRP at 4°C for 20 min. The cells were warmed to 37°C for 2 min to allow uptake and then incubated in DAB, with or without ascorbic acid (AA), fixed, and processed for resin embedding, exactly as described previously (54) . Due to the low transfection efficiency, GFP-expressing cells were identified by light microscopy before processing. They were marked to allow subsequent location for sectioning. Quantitation of PM coverage of the HRP reaction product was by intersection counting. The number of intersections of a square lattice grid with unlabeled and DAB-covered areas of the PM in random areas of transfected WT Cav1 or Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs was measured on digital images to gain an estimate of PM coverage by the HRP reaction.

Ϫ/Ϫ MEF Cells-To better understand the functional link between dysferlin and Cav3 we examined the subcellular distribution of truncation mutants of dysferlin and analyzed their trafficking dependence on caveolin. We used WT Cav1 and Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs as a model system. Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells have no detectable caveolae as they lack Cav1 (as well as the muscle-specific isoform Cav3). This represents a powerful model system to analyze dysferlin trafficking with respect to caveolin as caveolin reexpression rescues the dysferlin trafficking defects (18) .
Truncated versions of dysferlin with an N-terminal GFP tag were generated (see summary in Fig. 1) . Expression of these mutants in baby hamster kidney cells showed single bands of the predicted molecular weight for each of the truncation mutants (Fig. 1B) . We compared the subcellular distribution of the mutant proteins to the WT protein by heterologous expression of truncation mutant forms of dysferlin in WT Cav1 or Cav1
MEFs (refer to summary table in Fig.  1 ). Full-length dysferlin efficiently reaches the PM in WT Cav1 MEFs (Fig. 1C) , consistent with previous results (18) . In contrast, dysferlin localized to intracellular structures but not to the Golgi complex in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells (Fig. 1C ). GFP⌬-2, which lacks the three first C2 domains, was found to mainly localize to the endoplasmic reticulum as judged by a large overlap with the endoplasmic reticulum marker, protein-disulfide isomerase (Fig. 1,  C-E) . Truncated versions of dysferlin lacking the TM domain, GFP⌬-3 and GFP⌬-TM, were however, mainly cytosolic (Fig. 1, C MEFs. GFP⌬-1 efficiently exited the Golgi apparatus and reached the PM (Fig.  2) . Quantitation showed that in ϳ66% of Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs expressing Cav1-HA or Cav3-HA, GFP⌬-1 was localized to the PM and to intracellular puncta (Fig. 2B) . GFP⌬-C2, a mutant lacking all six C2 domains was predominantly targeted to the PM in both WT Cav1 (not shown) and Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs (Figs. 1, C-E, and 3, A and B). Quantitation of Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs expressing GFP⌬-C2 showed that in ϳ97% of the cells, GFP⌬-C2 localized to the PM.
Taken together these results show that GFP⌬-1, which lacks the first four C2 domains, predominantly accumulates in the Golgi complex in the absence of caveolin. This suggests that caveolin is required for GFP⌬-1 transport from the Golgi complex to the PM. In contrast, a mutant lacking all six C2 domains is not retained in the Golgi complex in the presence or absence of caveolin. The loss of all six C2 domains renders mutated dysferlin independent of caveolin for surface delivery.
The fact that GFP⌬-C2 efficiently reached the PM in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs ( Fig. 3) showed that this truncated protein was not dependent on caveolin for surface targeting. We investigated whether a Golgi-localized dystrophy mutant of Cav3 (Cav3P104L-HA), which causes retention of full-length dysferlin in the Golgi complex (18) would affect the traffic of GFP⌬-C2 to the PM. Cells co-expressing epitope-tagged Cav3P104L (Cav3P104L-HA) and GFP⌬-C2 showed a dramatic accumulation in the Golgi complex (66% of the cells) compared with cells expressing mutated dysferlin alone (4% of the cells) (Fig. 3) . Thus GFP⌬-C2, which does not require caveolin for Golgi exit and PM targeting, is blocked in trafficking from the Golgi by the P104L caveolin mutant.
In the absence of caveolin dysferlin accumulates in an intracellular compartment of unknown nature. The identification of these structures should provide insights into the role of caveolins in dysferlin trafficking. We first examined whether dysferlin was targeted for degradation in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells. However, dysferlin failed to co-localize significantly with markers of the late endocytic pathway such as LBPA and LAMP1 (supplemental Fig.  S1A ). Despite the low surface labeling in the Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs, we speculated that dysferlin is able to reach the PM but then is efficiently endocytosed in the absence of caveolin. If this was the case, antibodies to the lumenal myc epitope should be readily internalized by Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells expressing GFPDysf but not by WT Cav1 cells. WT Cav1 and Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs were transfected with a dysferlin cDNA containing an N-terminal GFP tag and a C-terminal (lumenal/extracellular) myc tag (GFPDysf). After 4 h post-transfection, antibodies against the dysferlin ectoplasmic myc tag were added to the culture medium and antibodies were allowed to internalize overnight. The cells were then fixed, permeabilized, and labeled with secondary antibodies. A striking accumulation 
Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs (Fig. 4A ), very little was internalized in WT Cav1 and no uptake was observed in neighboring non-transfected cells (see Fig. 4A ) indicating that the antibodies were taken up specifically after binding to the exposed lumenal myc epitope and not by fluid phase uptake. Consistent with this, the internalized antibodies colocalized with GFPDysf. Identical results were obtained when experiments were performed using Fab fragments against the myc epitope (supplemental Fig. S1B ). Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs expressing GFP-dysf showed higher uptake of Fab fragments compared with WT Cav1 cells (supplemental Fig. S1B ). There was no colocalization of Fab fragments and transferrin in WT Cav1 or Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells at any of the time points examined (data not shown).
To investigate this in more detail, myc antibodies were bound to the surface of GFPDysf expressing Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ or WT Cav1 cells at 4°C and warmed for 30 min at 37°C to allow internalization of the antibodies. Surface antibodies were removed by an acid wash. Interestingly, in WT Cav1 or Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs, significant GFPDysf internalization was observed after 30 min. Despite the low level of PM dysferlin, Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs contained many more vesicles positive for both GFP and myc ( , IC/PM ratio ϭ 1.07 Ϯ 0.12) (Fig. 4C) . Furthermore, and consistent with our previous work (18), we predicted that re-expression of Cav1-HA in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs would inhibit dysferlin internalization (Fig. 4D) . Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs co-expressing GFPDysf and Cav1-HA showed a distribution of dysferlin similar to that seen in WT Cav1 MEFs (refer to supplemental 4D) . Thus these results demonstrate that the major effect of caveolin is to retain dysferlin at the PM and inhibit its internalization. These results demonstrate that dysferlin is not absolutely dependent on caveolin to reach the PM but is efficiently retained at the PM in the presence of caveolin. Taken together, these results show a hitherto unexpected dynamic cycling of dysferlin in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells. Dysferlin Is Internalized Through a Clathrin-independent Endocytic Pathway-We next examined the pathway by which dysferlin is internalized in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs using transferrin to label the clathrin pathway and cholera toxin binding subunit (CTB) or GPI-anchored proteins (AP) as markers of other pathways. Myc antibodies taken up by expressed GFP-dysferlin for various times did not colocalize significantly with transferrin (Fig. 5A) . However, significant colocalization of internalized myc antibodies and CTB was evident after 2, 10, and 40 min of internalization (Fig. 5A) . No significant difference in the internalization rate of transferrin or CTB was seen between WT Cav1 or Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs (supplemental Fig. S2B ). GPI-AP are internalized via a clathrin-and dynamin-independent endocytic pathway (54 -56) . To test if dysferlin was trafficking from the PM via this pathway we co-internalized antibodies against the extracellular tags (mouse anti-myc for dysferlin and rabbit anti-GFP for GPI-GFP). Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs co-expressing GFPDysf and GPI-GFP were labeled on ice with anti-myc and anti-GFP antibodies, warmed to 37°C for 2, 10, and 40 min, and then acid-washed. Internalized antibodies were detected with anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 546 and anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 647 antibodies after permeabilization. At all time points endocytic vesicles containing myc and GFP antibodies were readily detectable (Fig. 5A) , demonstrating that internalized dysferlin was targeted to a GPI-AP enriched compartment. We further investigated if dysferlin vesicular traffic followed a dynamin-dependent route using the dynamin inhibitor, Dynasore (57, 58) . Whereas transferrin uptake was blocked, dysferlin endocytosis was unaffected by incubation with Dynasore (Fig. 5B) . We conclude that the major endocytic pathway involved in dysferlin endocytosis in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells is dynamin-independent.
Ultrastructural Analysis of Dysferlin Trafficking-To gain further insights into dysferlin endocytosis, Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ or WT Cav1 MEFs were transfected with GFP-dysf, then incubated with anti-myc antibodies followed by an anti-mouse HRP-labeled antibody at 4°C. The cells were then warmed for 2 min at 37°C, and the DAB reaction visualized in the presence or absence of AA to identify internal structures, as in previous studies (54) . The cells were then fixed and processed for correlative light and electron microscopy, identifying GFP-dysfexpressing cells by light microscopy and then sectioning the plastic embedded cells for EM. Consistent with the light microscopy, WT cells showed a uniform, almost continuous, layer of HRP reaction product over the entire cell surface (WT Cav1 Ϫ AA; Fig. 6, A and B) and little internal staining. No preferential staining of caveolae was observed, consistent with our previous immunoelectromicrograph studies (18) . In contrast, Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs showed very patchy sparse labeling over the cell surface (KO Ϫ AA; Fig. 6 , C and D) but with some tubular profiles apparently enriched in reaction product (Fig. 6, E and G) . Quantitation of the surface coverage of the HRP reaction product in WT Cav1 versus Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells showed a far higher surface coverage in the WT Cav1 cells (see Fig. 6 , A and C) consistent with the low level of surface labeling in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells as observed by light microscopy. Endocytic structures were clearly observed in the Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells treated with AA (KO ϩ AA, Fig. 6, H and I) . The ring-shaped morphology and size of the labeled elements are consistent with Ϫ/Ϫ cells (*, untransfected cell; **, cell expressing low levels of dysferlin) but in WT Cav1 cells there is very little internalization. B, in WT Cav1 MEFs dysferlin is mainly localized at the PM although some internalized myc can be seen after 30 min (see inset). In contrast after 30 min of myc antibody internalization, dysferlin shows a highly dynamic endocytic traffic in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells; inset, extensive overlay between GFPDysf and internalized myc. C, time course of myc antibodies uptake in WT or Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs expressing GFPDysf. The mean fluorescence intensity of dysferlin associated with the PM (myc surface labeling) and internalized myc (2, 10, and 40 min chase at 37°C) was measured and expressed as IC/PM ratio. D, dysferlin internalization is rescued to WT levels by expression of epitope-tagged Cav1 in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs. WT Cav1 and Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs were transfected with GFPDysf or co-transfected with GFPDysf and Cav1-HA and anti-myc antibodies were internalized for 20 min at 37°C. The mean fluorescence intensity of internalized dysferlin (myc labeling) was quantified. Error bars are S.E. of three experiments (n ϭ 30). Bars, 10 m.
Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs in the previous studies (54) . These studies show that dysferlin is retained over the entire cell surface in the presence of caveolin but is rapidly internalized in its absence.
Ϫ/Ϫ MEF Cells-To gain further insights into the functional interaction between dysferlin and caveolin and the relevance of these observations to muscle disease, we examined the effect of caveolin mutants on dysferlin endocytosis as compared with wild type caveolin. We made use of HAtagged CSD point mutants, Cav3G55S (Cav3G55S-HA) and Cav3C71W (Cav3C71W-HA) (50, 59) , which have been linked to muscular dystrophy (11, 13) and the CSD deletion mutant, Cav1⌬81-100 (Cav1⌬-81-100-HA) (60) . Quantitation of surface versus intracellular dysferlin was performed using antibodies to the lumenal myc tag as in previous studies (18) . Cav3G55S-HA or Cav3C71W-HA expressed in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs localized predominantly at the surface in a similar fashion to the wild type protein (Fig. 7) , whereas Cav1⌬81-100-HA mainly targeted to the Golgi complex as judged by colocalization with the Golgi marker, GM130 (Fig. 7) . GFP-dysf was largely localized to intracellular puncta in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells (PM/IC ratio 0.67 Ϯ 0.07) but PM association was restored by re-expression of either Cav1-HA (PM/IC ratio 1.99 Ϯ 0.96) or Cav3-HA (PM/IC ratio 2.3 Ϯ 0.55) (18) (Fig. 8, A and  B) . In contrast, expression of Cav1⌬81-100-HA (PM/IC ratio 0.61 Ϯ 0.10), Cav3G55S-HA (PM/IC ratio 0.65 Ϯ 0.15), or Cav3C71W-HA (PM/IC ratio 1.16 Ϯ 0.57) did not affect dysferlin traffic to the PM and dysferlin remained enriched in intracellular vesicles of Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs (Fig. 8B) . The lack of an inhibitory effect of these mutants on dysferlin endocytosis is also shown by the uptake of myc antibodies when these mutants are expressed together with GFP-dysf, as compared with the WT Cav3 protein (Fig. 8C) . The above results suggest that this conserved domain of caveolin is required for inhibition of dysferlin endocytosis and its retention at the PM.
Dominant acting mutants of Cav3 cause a reduction in surface Cav3, retention of Cav3 in the Golgi complex, and increased degradation (61, 62) . We have previously shown that these mutants cause an accumulation of dysferlin in the Golgi complex. We investigated whether this was a result of a block of dysferlin exit from the Golgi rather than a consequence of redistribution due to dysferlin instability at the PM in the Ϫ/Ϫ cells were transfected with GFP-dysf or co-transfected with GFP-dysf and TFR or GPI-GFP. Anti-myc antibodies were co-internalized with fluorophore-conjugated Tfn or CTB or anti-GFP antibodies for various times at 37°C. Dysferlin is internalized mainly via a non-clathrin pathway. No significant colocalization is seen between internalized myc antibodies and Tfn. Dysferlin follows CTB and GPI in their endocytic traffic. Extensive co-internalization is visualized with anti-myc (GFP-dysf) and CTB and GFP (GPI-GFP) after 2, 10, and 40 min uptake. B, dynamin inhibitor, Dynasore, does not block dysferlin endocytic traffic. absence of caveolin. No myc antibody uptake was evident in the perinuclear region or intracellular vesicles (Fig. 9A) suggesting that dysferlin exit from the Golgi complex was blocked by the dystrophy-associated mutant caveolin and that these mutants have a dominant inhibitory role on Golgi exit. This effect of caveolin-dystrophy mutants on dysferlin exit from the Golgi complex is specific and not a result of their Golgi localization. Expression of a CSD deletion mutant, Cav1⌬81-100, which is also Golgi localized does not restrain dysferlin from exiting the Golgi (Fig. 9B) . Taken together, these results show two distinct effects of caveolin mutants on trafficking of dysferlin.
In this work we have provided novel insights into dysferlin trafficking dynamics with respect to caveolin. Through the use of cells lacking caveolin, by expression of caveolin mutants, and by using different mutants of dysferlin, we have now identified the precise steps in dysferlin trafficking that are regulated by caveolin. We show directly that caveolins can facilitate exit of dysferlin mutants from the Golgi complex. In addition, dominant-acting caveolin mutants inhibit Golgi exit of mutant or wild type dysferlin. However, most unexpectedly, we now show that the primary effect of caveolin is to inhibit dysferlin endocytosis, implicating an endocytic mechanism in caveolin-associated muscle pathology.
Caveolin Modulation of Dysferlin Exit from the Golgi Complex-In cells devoid of caveolin dysferlin accumulates in intracellular vesicular structures, which we now show are endocytic in nature. No accumulation was observed in the Golgi complex and we demonstrated that despite the lack of surface labeling, dysferlin is rapidly transiting the cell surface in these cells, as shown by uptake of extracellular antibodies to a lumenal tag. These results suggest that dysferlin does not absolutely depend on caveolin for Golgi exit. Recent studies have suggested that novel exocytic carriers, containing defined quanta of caveolin, leave the Golgi complex and fuse directly with the PM (63). These carriers, termed exocytic caveolar carriers (64) , form a novel exocytic pathway distinct from classical exocytic carriers (see scheme in Fig. 10) ; these carriers would presumably be absent in cells lacking caveolin. Our data provide new insights into these pathways. Full-length dysferlin can clearly utilize a non-caveolar carrier pathway to reach the PM, as shown in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells. Similarly, a dysferlin mutant lacking all six C2 domains (⌬-C2) can also efficiently reach the PM, both in the absence or presence of caveolin again showing use of a non-caveolar carrier. However, in stark contrast to these two constructs, a protein of intermediate length, which lacks four C2 domains, shows an absolute dependence on caveolin for exit from the Golgi complex ( Fig. 2 and scheme in Fig. 10 ). Whereas this is an artificially generated construct, these results clearly demonstrate a role for caveolin in Golgi exit, as suggested previously for a number of proteins including the angiotensin receptor (59), insulin receptor (65) , and the stretch-activated channel, TRPC1 (66) . The structural features that make these proteins dependent on caveolin for Golgi exit Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs were transfected with GFPDysf and then after 14 h were incubated sequentially with antibodies to the lumenal myc tag and then HRP-labeled secondary (anti-mouse) antibodies at 4°C. The cells were then warmed to 37°C for 2 min to allow endocytosis to occur. The DAB reaction was performed on the living cells at 4°C in the presence (ϩAA) or absence (ϪAA) of ascorbic acid as indicated. After fixation the transfected cells were identified under the light microscope by their GFP fluorescence and were marked to allow subsequent identification after embedding in resin. The marked areas were sectioned and viewed unstained. In the absence of AA, allowing visualization of both surface and intracellular pools of HRP, WT Cav1 cells showed HRP reaction product over the entire cell surface (A and B) . In striking contrast, all transfected Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells showed sparse patchy surface labeling (C and D; arrowheads) consistent with greatly reduced retention of dysferlin at the plasma membrane. Quantitation of surface coverage by intersection counting (see "Experimental Procedures") showed that 10.3% of the PM of Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells was covered in HRP reaction product and 89.0% of the PM of WT cells. Neighboring untransfected cells showed no trace of HRP labeling (results not shown) demonstrating the specificity of the antibody labeling. Potential clathrin-independent early endocytic carriers (arrowheads) were frequently observed in the Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells (E-G). In the presence of ascorbic acid to quench extracellular HRP, internal ring-shaped endocytic elements were clearly demonstrated in the Cav1
are as yet, unclear. In the case of dysferlin, it appears that the shorter construct is absolutely dependent on the caveolar pathway, whereas the additional cytoplasmic region of the fulllength protein allows the protein to use multiple pathways. This might involve interaction of the terminal C2 domains with cellular machinery involved in trafficking via these caveolin-independent pathways. One candidate protein is Ahnak, which interacts with the C2A domain of dysferlin (67) . Ahnak is a marker of a distinct exocytic vesicle, the enlargeosome (68, 69) . Consistent with a role for dysferlin in membrane repair (24) , enlargeosomes are proposed to be the source of membrane during PM resealing (68) . Although enlargeosomes do not associate with caveolin-enriched detergent-resistant membranes (69) it remains to be examined whether dysferlin exits the Golgi via enlargeosomes. As C2 domains have also been implicated in phospholipid binding it is also possible that interaction with the distinct domains of the Golgi membrane allow segregation of dysferlin away from the caveolar domain.
have previously demonstrated that dystrophy-associated mutants of caveolin (Cav3P104L and Cav3R26Q) cause dysferlin accumulation within the Golgi complex (18) . We find no evidence for dysferlin transport to the cell surface under these conditions suggesting that the caveolin mutants cause a complete block in Golgi exit. Interestingly, this was true for all the tested membraneassociated dysferlin constructs, including ⌬-C2, which lacks most of the cytoplasmic domain and traffics to the PM in a caveolinindependent manner. This raises the possibility that mutant caveolin might perturb dysferlin trafficking at an earlier stage in the Golgi complex, before divergence of the two pathways. Consistent with this, Golgi caveolin mutants accumulate throughout the Golgi complex including the cis Golgi (18, 47) . The specificity of this effect is shown by the fact that a Golgi-localized form of caveolin lacking amino acids 81-100 does not prevent dysferlin from exiting the Golgi. This suggests that a direct interaction between dysferlin and caveolin, at least, at the Golgi level may be taking place. If so, this narrows down the interacting domain of dysferlin to the TM domain and nearby cytoplasmic region, which contains four potential CSD binding motifs. However, these findings do not rule out perturbation of lipid domains of the Golgi complex, which may be influenced by expression of a form of caveolin with mutations in this potential lipid-binding domain (45) . If so, these effects are restricted to specific cargo proteins as the transit of other proteins, such as GPI-anchored proteins, through the Golgi complex is unaffected by the expression of the mutant caveolin proteins (18) .
Caveolins Inhibit Dysferlin Endocytosis-We show here for the first time that caveolins inhibit endocytosis of dysferlin. In cells lacking Cav1 and Cav3, dysferlin is rapidly cleared from the PM resulting in a low level of PM dysferlin in contrast to a large intracellular pool at steady state. Our results show a much higher endocytic rate for dysferlin in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells as antibodies to a lumenal tag accumulate far more rapidly in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells than in cells expressing Cav1 or Cav3 despite the higher level of surface dysferlin in these cells (see Figs. 4 and 8) (18) . Expression of Cav1 or Cav3, but not specific caveolin mutants, inhibits dysferlin endocytosis resulting in its retention at the cell surface and a high level of PM dysferlin. Dysferlin endocytosis in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells is via a dynamin (and caveolin-)-independent pathway. Colocalization with GPI-anchored proteins and CTB, but not transferrin, at early stages of endocytosis strongly implicates the CLIC/GEEC clathrin-independent pathway (54, 56) in dysferlin endocytosis. This is supported by ultrastructural analysis of the endocytic pathway showing dysferlin in tubular/ring-shaped early endosomal elements. These results suggest a novel role of this pathway in regulating dysferlin surface expression and, a role for caveolin in inhibiting the clathrin-independent endocytosis of specific markers.
The inhibitory effect of caveolins on dysferlin endocytosis presents an interesting conundrum. We believe that a direct inhibitory effect of caveolin by binding dysferlin to immobile caveolar domains is unlikely; both electron microscopy and light microscopy show that dysferlin does not colocalize significantly with caveolin, even at the level of light microscopy, and both immuno-EM on frozen sections (18) and EM surface labeling experiments (this study) confirmed that dysferlin was not concentrated within caveolae. Thus, the inhibition by caveolin appears to be indirect. Yet our results suggest that the effect of caveolin on dysferlin endocytosis is specific; whereas acute Cav1 expression has been shown to inhibit clathrin-independent endocytosis of CTB (54, 70) and SV40 is efficiently internalized by cells devoid of caveolae (71) CTB and SV40 internalization was quantitatively identical in WT Cav1 and Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEFs as used here. Furthermore, no effect on GPI-AP internalization could be detected in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells. This argues against a general negative inhibitory role of caveolins on clathrin-independent endocytosis, but suggests that caveolins specifically inhibit dysferlin entry into this pathway. We could also show that the increased uptake of dysferlin in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells was not due to increased endocytosis caused by dysferlin expression (results not shown). Caveolae have been suggested to be negative regulators of clathrin-independent endocytosis (70, 72) but other work identifies caveolae as endocytic vehicles (73) (74) (75) . A new concept described here is that caveolin is regulating the non-caveolar endocytosis of dysferlin as we have FIGURE 8 . Dysferlin retention at the PM is dependent on an intact CSD. Expression of CSD point mutants does not rescue dysferlin traffic to the PM in Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ MEF cells. Cav1 Ϫ/Ϫ cells were transfected with GFPDysf or co-transfected with GFPDysf and HA-tagged Cav3, Cav3G55S, Cav3C71W, Cav1⌬81-100, and Cav3P104L and labeled with rabbit anti-HA and mouse anti-myc antibodies. Surface labeling of dysferlin and quantification of PM and intracellular pools of dysferlin were performed as described under "Experimental Procedures." A, in cells lacking caveolin dysferlin is mainly targeted to intracellular puncta throughout the cytoplasm. Whereas expression of epitope-tagged Cav3 rescues dysferlin traffic to the PM, expression of CSD mutants (i.e. Cav3G55S) does not rescue dysferlin traffic to the PM. B, the mean fluorescence intensity of dysferlin associated with the PM (myc labeling) and intracellular structures (GFP labeling) was measured and expressed as the PM/IC ratio. Error bars are S.E. of three experiments (n ϭ 30); **, p Ͻ 0.001. C, Cav1
Ϫ/Ϫ cells co-expressing GFPDysf and HA-tagged, Cav3C71W, Cav3G55S, or Cav3 were allowed to uptake anti-myc antibodies for 10 min at 37°C. Expression of Cav3C71W or Cav3G55S, but not WT Cav3 protein, have no effect on dysferlin endocytosis as demonstrated by the internalization of anti-myc antibodies. Bars, 10 m.
clearly demonstrated that dysferlin is not concentrated in caveolae.
A model for the inhibitory effect of caveolin on endocytosis must take into account the intriguing finding that two Cav3 single point mutants, which occur naturally in the human population, did not inhibit dysferlin endocytosis in complete contrast to the wild type protein. This implicates the scaffolding domain of caveolin in its inhibitory activity. The two inhibitory mutants were initially reported as dystrophy mutants (11) but subsequently have been shown to occur as polymorphisms in the population (76, 77) . Yet two previous studies have shown specific effects of these mutant proteins in cultured cells (50, 59) . Further studies should elucidate the underlying mechanisms involved in the inhibitory activity of the wild type protein in comparison to these single point mutants and whether these mutations can contribute to disease under certain conditions.
In conclusion, these studies have elucidated distinct roles of caveolin in regulating dysferlin trafficking pathways, both in positively regulating exocytosis and negatively regulating endocytosis via a clathrin-independent pathway for which dysferlin acts as a new marker. An interesting possibility is that this inhibitory activity of caveolin on endocytosis is regulated in vivo, allowing modulation of the surface levels of dysferlin and membrane remodeling. Whether caveolin acts in a similar fashion on other surface proteins will require further investigation. The involvement of endocytosis in muscle disease may be a more general phenomenon. Another sarcolemmal protein, ␣-sarcoglycan, which is linked to a subset of muscle disease limb girdle muscular dystrophy 2D (78, 79) , is translocated from the cell surface to endosomes upon perturbation of its PM stability (80) . ␣-Sarcoglycan stability at the PM relies on a proper assembly of the sarcoglycan complex (80) . Thus dysferlin and ␣-sarcoglycan represent examples of sarcolemmal proteins where endocytic mechanisms play a central role in maintaining the integrity of the PM.
These results provide new insights into the functions of caveolins and the mechanisms underlying caveolin-related diseases. In addition, they provide fundamental insights into the regulation of exocytic and endocytic trafficking pathways of membrane proteins in mammalian cells and the importance of this poorly characterized clathrin-independent endocytic pathway in surface remodeling of specific PM components. Ϫ/Ϫ cells were co-transfected with GFPDysf and HA-tagged Cav3P104L or Cav1⌬81-100 and labeled with rabbit anti-HA (A and B) and mouse anti-GM130 (B) antibodies. Anti-myc antibody was internalized overnight (B). A, expression of Cav3P04L-HA blocks dysferlin exit from the Golgi apparatus. No significant Golgi pool of internalized myc antibodies is seen after overnight incubation at 37°C. B, expression of Golgilocalized epitope-tagged Cav1⌬81-100 mutant does not affect GFP-dysf exit from the Golgi apparatus. Cav1⌬81-100, but not GFPDysf, is retained in the Golgi complex as demonstrated by colocalization with the Golgi marker, GM130. Bars, 10 m. Ϫ/Ϫ cells dysferlin must use an alternative pathway(s). However, a truncation mutant lacking part of the cytoplasmic domain (⌬-1) is completely dependent on caveolin for Golgi exit as it cannot enter the non-caveolar pathway. A more severe mutant (⌬-C2) traffics to the PM in a caveolin-independent manner as it lacks information for incorporation into caveolar carriers. Retention of dysferlin at the PM is dependent on caveolin/caveolae due to inhibition of dysferlin endocytosis by caveolin. A truncation of dysferlin lacking all six C2 domains, ⌬-C2, is not internalized suggesting a role for the cytoplasmic domain in endocytosis.
Focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) is a frequent epileptogenic developmental malformation in children and adults undergoing epilepsy surgery. 1 While FCD type II combining cytological anomalies with varying degrees of dyslamination 2 is generally associated with obvious morphology and signal changes on MRI, 3 the imaging signature of FCD type I, characterized by subtle cortical thinning and dyslamination, 2 remains elusive. Because of the crucial role of MRI in defining the surgical target, imaging studies in FCD have been primarily dedicated to lesion detection in single patients. 4 Whole-brain cohortspecific structural brain anomalies remain largely unknown. 5 In other epilepsy syndromes, group-based designs have provided new insights by unveiling clinically relevant characteristics and helped in formulating hypotheses about disease mechanisms. 6, 7 In this study, we aimed to compare whole-brain morphology between frontal lobe epilepsy cohorts with histologically verified FCD type I and II. Our approach was motivated by case reports indicating that FCD type II may present with histologic 8 and MRI anomalies 9, 10 in remote cortices resembling those found in the primary lesion and that type I may be associated with subtle multilobar hypoplasia on MRI. 11 We hypothesized widespread, yet diverging patterns of anomalies, with cortical thinning in FCD type I and thickening in type II. Our MRI phenotyping combined group-and individual-level analysis of cortical thickness and folding complexity, 2 established in vivo markers of brain morphology and development. We evaluated the clinical utility of group-level patterns to classify the histopathologic FCD subtype, lateralize the seizure focus, and to predict postsurgical seizure outcome in individual patients using machine learning.
METHODS Participants. From a database of patients hospitalized for presurgical workup of drug-resistant extratemporal epilepsy at the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) and Hospital who underwent video-EEG telemetry and were examined on a single scanner with an identical imaging protocol 12 (n 5 73), we selected those with frontal lobe epilepsy and histologically verified FCD (type I, n 5 13; type II, n 5 28).
In patients with FCD type II, the lesion was seen either on conventional MRI (n 5 18) or became visible through texture analysis 13 (n 5 10). In the latter group, surgery was preceded by invasive monitoring using stereotactic implanted depth electrodes (stereoelectroencephalography [SEEG]), with positioning of the leads guided by the putative lesion seen on texture maps; in all, SEEG demonstrated a very active interictal activity and focal changes at seizure onset in the electrodes targeting the lesion. Mean postoperative follow-up time was 4.9 6 3 years; 18 patients became seizure-free (Engel Class I), 14 6 had rare disabling seizures (Engel II), and 4 with lesions encroaching eloquent areas had worthwhile improvement (Engel III) as lesionectomy was incomplete. In patients with FCD type I, both preoperative visual MRI and image processing were unremarkable; surgery in these patients was preceded by SEEG. Implantations were guided by findings derived from video-EEG telemetry with scalp electrodes in all, with additional help from FDG-PET ([ 18 F]-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET) (n 5 9) and SPECT (n 5 7) data, and resulted in focal corticectomies in the supplementary motor area in 5 patients, prefrontal cortex in 4, lower central in 3, and orbitofrontal in one. Mean postoperative follow-up was 3.9 6 2 years; 3 patients became seizure-free (Engel I), 3 had rare disabling seizures (Engel II), 5 a worthwhile improvement (Engel III) , and 2 no improvement (Engel IV).
Patient cohorts did not differ in age, disease duration, sex distribution, seizure focus lateralization, and number of generalized seizures (p . 0.15). The control group consisted of 41 age-and sex-matched healthy individuals. Demographic, clinical, and electrophysiologic data are presented in the table.
Standard protocol approvals, registrations, and patient consents. The ethics committee of the MNI approved the study and written informed consent was obtained from all participants.
MRI acquisition and image preparation. Images were acquired on a 1.5T Gyroscan (Philips, Eindhoven, the Netherlands) using a 3-dimensional T1 fast field echo sequence (repetition time 5 18 milliseconds; echo time 5 10 milliseconds; flip angle 5 30°; matrix 5 256 3 256; field of view 5 256 3 256 mm 2 ; slice thickness 5 1 mm) providing isotropic voxel dimensions of 1 3 1 3 1 mm. MRI preprocessing included correction for intensity nonuniformity, intensity standardization, linear registration to the MNI152 template, and classification into white matter (WM), gray matter (GM), and CSF. 15 The Constrained Laplacian Anatomic Segmentation using Proximity (CLASP) algorithm 16 generated a model of the inner (WM-GM) and outer (GM-CSF) surfaces with 40k surface points (or vertices) for each hemisphere. Surfaces were aligned to a hemisphere-symmetric surface template to improve interindividual correspondence. 17 The accuracy of surface extractions was verified in all individuals before further analysis.
Surface-based morphometry. We generated cortical thickness and curvature maps using a previously reported methodology. 18, 19 Cortical thickness was measured as the distance between corresponding vertices of inner and outer surfaces. To measure curvature, we generated a surface model running at middistance between the inner and outer surfaces. We subsequently applied a barycentric smoothing with 3 iterations to reduce highfrequency noise in vertex positions. 20 Absolute mean curvature was calculated at each vertex to quantify changes in frequency and depth of sulcal and gyral folds, expressing local gyrification complexity. Structural metrics were blurred with a surfacebased kernel of full width at half maximum 5 20 mm that preserves cortical topology. 15 Analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using SurfStat for MATLAB. 21 Patients were analyzed relative to the epileptogenic hemisphere; the symmetric template used for surface registration ensured an unbiased analysis when sorting hemispheres into ipsilateral/contralateral to the focus. Furthermore, we normalized thickness and curvature at each vertex using a z-transformation with respect to the corresponding distribution in controls; in other words, each patient's right/left feature was expressed as z score with respect to right/left values in controls.
Mapping structural changes relative to controls. We assessed differences in cortical thickness and folding complexity between each patient group (i.e., FCD type I and type II) and controls using 2-tailed Student t tests at each vertex. Because curvature might be affected by variations of cortical thickness, we statistically adjusted this metric at every vertex by the corresponding thickness measure. 22 In FCD type II, to eliminate potential effect of the lesion on group comparisons, we performed an additional analysis in which lesion labels obtained through expert manual segmentation (D.S.) were projected onto cortical surfaces and blurred with a 20-mm kernel, excluding cortical measures that fell within the blurred labels.
For individual analysis, we calculated proportions of patients with thickness/curvature measures beyond 62 SD from the mean of controls across the cortical surface. 23 In FCD type II, lesional labels were excluded. A leave-one-out approach calculated unbiased prevalences in controls.
Direct contrast between patient groups. Cortical thickness and curvature were directly compared between groups using vertex-wise 2-sample t tests. Abbreviations: FCD 5 focal cortical dysplasia; GTCS 5 generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
Age, age at seizure onset, and duration of epilepsy are presented as mean 6 SD.
Group differences in postsurgical outcome. We subdivided patients into seizure-free (Engel Class I) and non-seizure-free (Classes II-IV) and compared cortical markers between outcome classes.
Automatic classification of individual patients. We evaluated the yield of group-level findings to predict FCD subtypes, lateralize the seizure focus, and determine postsurgical outcome using a machine-learning approach with leave-one-out validation. Each hemisphere was subdivided into 500 equally sized parcels. 24 The search space was confined to regions displaying group-level differences (FCD type I vs type II for subtype prediction, FCDs vs healthy controls for focus lateralization, and seizure-free vs non-seizure-free for outcome prediction). Each parcel falling into a significant cluster was mirrored to both left and right hemispheres, as one cannot assume to know focus-laterality in a new patient. We extracted mean thickness and curvature z scores from these parcels and fed them to a support vector machine (SVM) classifier that evaluated prediction performance based on single pairs of parcels. To optimize classification sensitivity, borrowing the concept of searchlight-based multivoxel pattern analysis, 10 we evaluated combinations of single pairs of parcels (preselected from those achieving .80% accuracy) using a separate SVM. The optimal number of parcel pairs was empirically set to 3.
Correction for multiple comparisons and assessment of classification accuracy. Group results were corrected using random field theory for nonisotropic images at a cluster level. 25 We used the function SurfStatP.m, with a search space constrained to the neocortical mantle in both hemispheres. This controlled the family-wise error (FWE) probability to p , 0.05. In all machinelearning experiments, we used permutation tests to confirm whether the achieved accuracy exceeded chance level (Bonferronicorrected p , 0.05). ipsilateral 26 and idiopathic generalized epilepsy, 27 is thought to reflect combined effects of neuronal disconnection and seizure-related damage. Sustained seizure activity may lead to cell loss in both seizure-generating regions and areas of spread, 28 particularly through upregulation of glutamate. 29 While this scenario may explain cortical thinning in our patients with type I FCD, it is seemingly at odds with findings in those with type II lesions, who showed increased thickness in several cortices. This paradox was further amplified when stratifying patients according to disease duration: close to the onset, patients with type I FCD displayed diffuse bilateral cortical atrophy, while those with type II lesions presented with marked and fairly extensive cortical thickening, even when controlling for age and after excluding the lesion label.
Diverging morphometric patterns, particularly at early disease stages, may point to distinct mechanisms and timing underlying the anomalous cortical development in these cohorts. Typical brain growth entails Figure 3 Morphologic markers of postsurgical seizure outcome
Cortical thickness comparison between seizure-free (Engel Class I) and non-seizure-free patients (Classes II-IV). See figure  1 for details on statistical procedures. Given the small number of seizure-free patients (n 5 3) in type I, findings were crossvalidated using nonparametric permutation tests, both for group comparison and family-wise error correction. FCD 5 focal cortical dysplasia.
a series of complex and overlapping steps, including synaptogenesis with elaboration of dendrites, which continue into early childhood. 30 In this context, pruning, a self-regulatory process starting in late gestation (which eliminates redundant axons, dendrites, and synapses, as well as neurons) has a pivotal role in shaping cortical network organization until late adolescence, sparing only the most efficient connectivity configurations. 31 Of note, in FCD type II, aberrant synaptogenesis of dysmorphic neurons and failure of oligodendroglial differentiation result in erroneous axonal processes and hypomyelination. 32 In light of our observations, one may postulate that the primary lesion and mutually connected cortices show delayed pruning that manifest as gray matter excess. Moreover, according to models of structural covariance and maturational coupling of brain networks, regions belonging to the same network show correlated growth due to exchange of trophic factors and common molecular signaling pathways. 33 Conceivably, developing cortices sharing links with the lesion may be influenced in similar ways. A post hoc analysis indeed supported a selective thickening of contralateral neocortices homotopic to the primary FCD type II in patients with short disease duration (p , 0.05 relative to controls), while thickness of nonhomotopic contralateral vertices was not increased.
Diffuse cortical thinning in FCD type I warrants several considerations. First, in light of the recent histopathologic findings showing a tendency for reduced cortical thickness in FCD type I, 32 primary frontal cortical thinning observed in our patients may reflect, in part, the primary lesion. This hypothesis is justified by our inclusion criteria, as we restricted the Figure 4 Machine-learning framework applied to FCD subtype prediction (A) Feature generation. Each hemisphere was subdivided into 500 equally sized parcels. The search space was confined to significant clusters of group-level differences (i.e., FCD type I vs type II). After mirroring each parcel to both left and right hemispheres, we generated a feature vector by extracting mean thickness and curvature z scores. (B) Single-parcel classification. Features obtained in panel A were fed to a support vector machine classifier, which evaluated subtype prediction performance at each pair of parcels. (C) Multiparcel classification. To optimize sensitivity, among parcels achieving .80% accuracy in panel B (color-coded in green), combinations of k pairs of parcels (optimal k empirically set at 3) were fed to a separate classifier. Multidimensional scaling allows reducing dimensionality to 2 dimensions while preserving interfeature distances. Misclassified cases are highlighted with an x. Steps A through C are performed in a leave-one-out framework that allows determining prediction accuracy for previously unseen cases. FCD 5 focal cortical dysplasia.
assessment to patients with frontal lobe epilepsy only. Second, in young children with psychomotor handicap, this malformation may span across several lobes. 34 Further support for the widespread nature of morphologic anomalies and the associated epileptogenic zone may come from the unfavorable surgical outcome after focal resections in our patients, in line with reported series of patients with nonlesional frontal lobe epilepsy. 1, 35 While pathogenic mechanisms underlying FCD type I remain largely uncertain, it is enticing to hypothesize that cortical architecture in this condition may relate to abnormal tangential migration. Contrary to excitatory projection neurons obeying the laws of gliophilic radial migration, the vast majority of GABAergic inhibitory interneurons arrive in the cortex via a tangential migratory corridor. 36 Of note, in this migration mode, neurons move parallel to the brain surface and their final positioning often transgresses regional boundaries. 37 Reduced arrival and abnormal maturation of inhibitory interneurons into the cortical plate may alter the balance between excitatory and inhibitory signaling, resulting in aberrant network hyperexcitability and widespread subtle morphologic defects. This hypothesis is supported by metabolic imaging studies showing diffuse abnormalities of g-aminobutyric acid type A receptors. 38 Alterations of folding patterns are often used to typify malformations of cortical development, ranging from reduction in lissencephaly spectrum disorders caused by defective early neuronal proliferation to increased folding frequency in polymicrogyrias related to abnormal postmigrational development. 39 Considering this continuum, decreased sulcal-gyral complexity in FCD type II reinforces the notion of a defect occurring during the initial stages of corticogenesis; conversely, increased complexity in FCD type I suggests a postmigrational anomaly. 39 Evidence-based clinical practice parameters foster novel combinations of quantitative neuroimaging with pattern learning techniques to objectively extract critical features and high-dimensional data relationships. 40 Our findings emphasize that group-level phenotypes may guide fully automated and accurate diagnostic procedures in single patients. While seizure focus lateralization may optimize the performance of automated lesion-detection algorithms, especially for previously overlooked lesions, noninvasive preoperative prediction of FCD subtype and outcome may have implications for surgical planning and optimized patient counseling.
Seok-Jun Hong: drafting manuscript for content, including medical writing, study concept and design, statistical analysis and interpretation of data. Boris C. Bernhardt: drafting manuscript for content, including medical writing, study concept and design, interpretation of data. Dewi S. Schrader: expert lesion segmentation. Neda Bernasconi: revising manuscript for content, including medical writing, study concept and design, interpretation of data, study supervision, obtaining funding. Andrea Bernasconi: revising manuscript for content, including medical writing, study concept and design, interpretation of data, acquisition of data, study supervision, obtaining funding. 

The development of X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) in pulsed magnetic fields (PMF) (Mathon et al., 2007) has significantly increased the field range accessible for XMCD studies from the limits of current superconducting magnets to fields of 30 T and beyond. The elemental and orbital selectivity of XMCD make it an important tool for studying the microscopic physics of magnetism and magnetic phase transitions at high fields. Recent examples of scientific applications include the study of magnetic-field-induced valence transitions (Matsuda et al., 2009 ) and magneto-structural effects (Sikora et al., 2009) .
Two different acquisition schemes are currently used to perform XMCD studies in PMF: in energy-scanning XMCD a series of field pulses is performed at each energy, using fast photodiodes and amplifiers capable of following the magnetic field pulse to detect the signal. This provides excellent consistency of the magnetic field dependence, while the energy spectra are constructed point by point. In energy-dispersive (ED) XMCD a focusing polychromator is used to introduce a correlation between the propagation direction and the photon energy. Using a position-sensitive detector the XMCD spectra are acquired simultaneously, resulting in excellent quality and resolution of the energy spectra. Up to now, however, ED-XMCD in PMF has been limited to the acquisition of one detector frame around peak field.
The present paper describes a multi-frame acquisition scheme for ED-XMCD. A series of spectra is acquired during the field pulse, thus combining the high quality of the energy spectra usually obtained in ED-XMCD with the consistency of the field dependence achieved in energy-scanning XMCD. The method was used to detect the weak XMCD signal at the Fe K-edge in ferrimagnetic erbium iron garnet (ErIG; Er 3 Fe 5 O 12 ). The quality of the spectra and of the field dependence of the XMCD amplitude allow for a quantitative evaluation of the Fe K-edge signal amplitude for the study of the Fe sublattice magnetization.
The experiments were performed at the energy-dispersive X-ray absorption spectroscopy beamline ID24 (Pascarelli et al., 2006) at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility. Fig. 1(a) shows the beamline layout.
The beam from an undulator source is focused vertically onto the detector by a first mirror (VFM), which also acts as a filter to reject higher harmonics and to reduce the heat load on the optics further downstream. A second mirror (HFM) focuses the beam horizontally, creating the divergence necessary to illuminate the polychromator and to obtain the desired spectral bandwidth. An ideally elliptically bent Si (111) polychromator crystal (PC) then refocuses the beam horizontally on the sample while introducing a correlation between the propagation direction and the photon energy. Finally, a position-sensitive detector (PSD) makes use of the energy-direction correlation to simultaneously acquire the energy dependence of the transmitted intensity. In order to generate light of circular polarization for the XMCD measurements over a large bandwidth a diamond (111) quarter-wave plate (QWP) is used in a quasi non-dispersive setting with the polychromator (Pizzini et al., 1998) . The miniature pulsed magnet system (M) consists of a liquidnitrogen-cooled coil reaching fields of 30 T and an independent He sample cryostat of the flow type covering sample temperatures from 5 K to 250 K. The coil is wound from Cu:Ag wire in two concentric parts with a gap for internal cooling in order to increase the pulse repetition rate. The magnet is energized through a bipolar thyristor-switched capacitive storage pulsed power supply, commercially available from Metis (http://www.metis.be/). A detailed description of the miniature pulsed magnet system is found by van der Linden et al. (2008) .
For the PSD we used the 'Quantum Detectors Ultra System' Si-strip detector, developed by the STFC (Science and Technology Facilities Council, http://www.stfc.ac.uk/) and commercially available through Quantum Detectors (http:// www.quantumdetectors.com/). The detector consists of a 300 mm-thick back-illuminated Si sensor with a linear array of 512 strips of pitch 50 mm and a usable strip length of 1.7 mm. The absorption at the Fe K-edge at 7.112 keV is about 99.8%. The detector strips are wire bonded directly to four X2CHIP readout application-specific integrated circuits. The X2CHIP contains 128 integrating amplifiers, each with four storage capacitors. The amplifier voltages are sampled at the beginning and end of the integration period on pairs of capacitors, and the voltages are then multiplexed onto the analogue outputs. Multiplexing is controlled by shift-registers and is configured as four separate 32-channel blocks. During the read-out cycle the amplifier voltages are stored on different capacitors so that readout and integration periods can be overlapped. The back-end data electronics removes common mode noise artifacts by taking a difference measurement between the X2CHIP outputs for the voltage sampled at the beginning and end of integration. This difference is then digitized by 16-bit 1 MHz analog-to-digital converters (ADCs). The output data from the ADCs are fed into a fieldprogrammable gate array which handles formatting of the data and transfer to a host by a 1 Gbit Ethernet connection. Our version of the detector is software limited (for compatibility with existing beamline systems) to recording a sequence of a maximum of 1500 frames. The detector can be set with exposure times ranging from 2 ms to 65 ms, has a fixed readout time of 50 ms per frame and a maximum repetition rate of 20 kHz. For integration with other beamline hardware the detector integration/readout is operated in an external trigger configuration with a trigger latency of 40 ns and a trigger jitter of AE 5 ns. However, the system can also be placed into a selftriggered mode. After completion of each sequence the data are transferred to a device server where they are recovered by the beamline control software.
Samples were small single crystals of ErIG oriented by Laue backscattering and mechanically polished with the surfaces perpendicular to the crystallographic (100) direction to a thickness of about 28 mm, resulting in an absorption step of 2.0 at the Fe K-edge. The samples were sandwiched between two 250 mm-thick Si plates with holes of diameter 500 mm, resulting in a free-standing sample in the area illuminated by the beam.
3. Multi-frame acquisition Fig. 1(b) shows the electronics used to control the experiment and the trigger chain for the detector.
The charging and triggering of the power supply (Metis) are carried out via the beamline control software, as detailed by Mathon et al. (2007) . The signal from the pick-up coil is recorded by an internally developed fast data acquisition card (MUSST), and serves to obtain the temporal profile of the field pulse through integration of the pick-up voltage (Fig. 1a) , as well as to generate a trigger for the delay and frame generators to synchronize the PSD to the field pulse. The trigger signal is passed through a delay generator (Stanford DG535) and then starts a pulse train generated by a Berkeley Nucleonics Corporation BNC 555 pulse generator to trigger the detector for the desired number of frames.
In the present experiment the XMCD signal was acquired at fixed left-or right-circular polarization while flipping the magnetic field. Each single acquisition results in an (n Â m) array of intensities, where n and m are the frame and pixel indices, respectively. A typical XMCD acquisition requires about 50 to 350 pairs of positive and negative magnetic field pulses. In order to obtain the XMCD spectra from the arrays of raw data, the series of vectors corresponding to each frame index was then processed using the scheme outlined by Mathon et al. (2004) , which eliminates the need to record (the energy dependence of) the incident intensity.
For cases in which the maximum detector frame rate of 20 kHz is too slow to precisely follow the field dependence of the XMCD signal, such as for example for the study of phase Metis: thyristor-switched capacitive storage pulsed power supply; minicoil: miniature pulsed magnet system; MUSST: fast data acquisition card; delay: Stanford DG535 delay generator; pulse-train: Berkeley Nucleonics Corporation BNC 555 pulse generator; PSD: Quantum Detectors 'Ultra' Si strip detector; spec: beamline control software.
transitions, two (x) acquisition series with pulse trains shifted by half (1/x) of the period can be acquired separately and then interleaved to increase the number of points in a field dependence. Here, two pulse trains with a period of 60 ms and an exposure time of 30 ms were interleaved (Fig. 2b) , resulting in the acquisition windows shown in Fig. 2(a) as red and green boxes. The period and exposure time were chosen as a compromise between the statistics per frame and the desired resolution. Fig. 3(a) shows the normalized absorption in ErIG at 65 K taken at the beamline ID24 (points) along with an ambient temperature spectrum from a powder sample recorded at beamline BM29 (line) that was used to calibrate the energy scale of the PSD. Fig. 3(b) shows the XMCD spectra obtained in two series of 350 pairs of positive and negative field pulses for each set of acquisitions. The whole energy range is affected by a floor of spatial noise, whereas the difference in the noise level below and above the absorption edge is mainly due to photon count statistics. The flux after the sample was estimated to be 4 Â 10 8 and 5 Â 10 7 photons stripe À1 s À1 for energies below and above the edge, respectively (note that the profile of the incident flux is not flat over the energy spectrum). Fig. 3 (c) once more shows the corresponding acquisition windows for reference. In the present experiment the miniature coil was operated with a repetition rate of approximately 2 pulses min À1 and the entire data set was acquired in just under 12 h.
The experiments were carried out on samples of ErIG which crystallizes in the cubic garnet structure. The cations are located at the centers of oxygen polyhedra with different symmetries. Per formula unit, two Fe occupy sites of octahedral and three Fe occupy sites of tetrahedral symmetry, whereas three Er are in a dodecahedral environment. Each site further occurs in different orientations within the unit cell. The cations interact magnetically via an antiferromagnetic exchange over the oxygen anions, where the relative strength of the interaction is determined mainly by the bond angles and distances. The antiferromagnetic interaction between the tetrahedral and octahedral Fe sites is strongest and remains unaffected up to high temperatures and very high applied fields. The interactions between the Fe sites and the Er sites are, however, much weaker and the fields available in the present experiment are comparable with the corresponding molecular field. In this context the system can thus be approximately described as a two-sublattice ferrimagnet (Clark & Callen, 1968) temperature T comp . Below T comp the system undergoes two successive phase transitions as a function of the applied field (Nakao et al., 1986) . Below H l the Er sublattice is aligned with the field while the net Fe moment is opposite; between H l and H u the Er and Fe moments form a canted phase in which the net Fe magnetization undergoes a continuous reversal while the Er spins are canted away from the applied field; and above H u both sublattices become aligned with the external field.
In the present experiments the beam and the magnetic field were parallel to the crystallographic (100) direction. The sample was cooled below the compensation point (T comp ' 79 K) at a temperature of 65 K. The XMCD signal visible in Fig. 3 coincides with the pre-peak which is attributed to the sites of tetrahedral symmetry (Kawamura et al., 1997; Maruyama & Kawamura, 2004) . For the interpretation we here make the simplifying assumption that the pre-edge signal is directly related to the tetrahedral Fe sites and thus to the net magnetization of Fe sublattices. At the main edge there is barely any XMCD signal visible with the available resolution. In the raw spectra in Fig. 3 a decrease, disappearance, reversal of sign and subsequent increase of the magnitude of the XMCD signal as a function of field are clearly observable. In order to plot the field dependence of the XMCD signal its amplitude was evaluated as the difference between the averages over the strips 174-176 and 178-180 in the raw spectra, which correspond to the minima and maxima centered at 7112.9 eV and 7114.2 eV, respectively. Fig. 4(a) shows the evolution of this amplitude during the magnetic field pulse, and Fig. 4(b) shows the resulting field dependence.
Below $ 8.4 T the amplitude barely evolves with the field; at $ 8.4 T the amplitude starts to decrease, crosses zero and continues to decrease until it saturates around $ 25.5 T at a magnitude slightly lower than the low field value, and opposite in sign. The data clearly reflect the expected behavior for the Fe sublattice magnetization and the transition fields are in agreement with the phase diagram published by Nakao et al. (1986) . A more detailed description and interpretation of the scientific results will be given elsewhere (Strohm et al., 2011) .
We have implemented a multi-frame acquisition scheme to perform ED-XMCD in pulsed high magnetic fields. This detection scheme allows the entire field pulse to be followed and thus combines the high quality of the energy spectra obtained in the dispersive geometry with a good consistency of the field dependence. The multi-frame detection significantly increases the overall efficiency of energy-dispersive experiments in pulsed magnetic fields. At the moment the speed of the available detector system is limited to 20 kHz. It was shown that higher temporal resolution can nevertheless be obtained by interleaving several acquisition series when required. The multi-frame acquisition scheme was used to perform Fe K-edge XMCD in samples of ErIG. Up to now, most, if not all, XMCD experiments in pulsed fields have been performed at L-edges, where the signal is typically of the order of several percent. The possibility to quantitatively exploit the small Fe K-edge signal significantly enlarges the number of accessible subjects. In the future we expect to use other Kedges in the energy range compatible with ID24 and the Ultra System, in particular the K-edges of Mn, Co, Ni and Cu. For the L-edges in the accessible energy range we may hope to be able to detect even small induced moments. We have studied the field dependence of the Fe K-edge XMCD signal in ErIG, below the compensation point. The pre-peak signal, associated with the Fe sites of tetrahedral symmetry, allows two successive phase transitions to be identified and the reversal of the net magnetization of the Fe sublattices in the intermediate canted phase to be observed.
Introduction aB-crystallin/HspB5 is a widely expressed member of the small heat shock protein (sHSP) family, which also includes Hsp27/HspB1 and HspB2/MKBP, defined by the presence of a conserved a-crystallin domain [1] . aB-crystallin promotes cell survival following its induction by cellular stressors, such as heat and reactive oxygen species (ROS), by inhibiting the aggregation of denatured or misfolded proteins and by increasing intracellular glutathione levels [2] [3] [4] [5] . More recently, aB-crystallin has been shown to inhibit apoptosis by suppressing caspase-3 activation and by sequestering pro-apoptotic effectors, such as Bax and Bcl-X s , in the cytoplasm, thereby conferring additional cytoprotection against cellular stress [6] [7] [8] [9] . HSF-1, lens epithelial derived growth factor (LEDGF)/p75 and the glucocorticoid receptor have been demonstrated to regulate the induction of aB-crystallin in response to hyperthermia, ROS and glucocorticoids [10] [11] [12] .
We postulated that additional transcriptional regulators of the mammalian stress response might regulate aB-crystallin gene expression. Here, we report that the aB-crystallin gene is regulated by a novel mechanism involving multiple p53 family members. The p53 protein is a critical mediator of the cellular response to genotoxic stress and plays a fundamental role in tumor suppression, as evidenced by the Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s10549-009-0542-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. frequent inactivation of the p53 pathway in a broad spectrum of tumors [13] . Classically, p53 inhibits tumor initiation by transcriptionally coordinating several cellular programs that prevent propagation of damaged genomes: cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, senescence and apoptosis. p53 biology has been dramatically revised with the discovery of additional p53 family members, p63 and p73. TAp63 and TAp73 have been shown to transactivate many p53 target genes [14] [15] [16] . Moreover, p63 and p73 are required for p53-dependent apoptosis and/or cell cycle arrest in some systems, and p73 can mediate these responses in the absence of p53 [17] [18] [19] . Through an alternative promoter, the p63 and p73 genes also express DN isoforms that lack the N-terminal transactivation domain. DNp63 and DNp73 act in a dominant negative fashion on p53 activity by competing for p53RE binding and on TAp63 and TAp73 activity through the formation of inactive heterotetramers [20, 21] . In light of their ability to inhibit p53, DN isoforms likely play an important role in tumor biology. Indeed, DNp73 expression enhances Ras-mediated transformation, counters p53-mediated apoptosis in development, and is expressed in several clinically aggressive tumor types [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] . In addition to this antagonistic function, DNp63 and DNp73 appear to independently transactivate genes and induce cell cycle arrest or apoptosis [28] [29] [30] [31] . Alternative 3 0 splicing generates 3 p63 (a, b, c) and 8 p73 (a, b, c, f, d, h, g, g1) Cterminal isoforms [32, 33] . Additionally, p53 family members transcriptionally regulate each other to form overlapping positive and negative feedback loops [20, 34, 35] . The complexity of the p53 family transcriptional regulation network and its role in cancer are topics of intense investigation and have yet to be fully resolved.
In this manuscript, we demonstrate that genotoxic stress induces aB-crystallin by a p53-dependent mechanism. Intriguingly, p53 activates aB-crystallin gene expression by an indirect mechanism that results in delayed induction of aB-crystallin compared to p21. Instead, p53 robustly induces DNp73, which in turn activates aB-crystallin gene expression. Taken together, our findings point to a novel link between aB-crystallin and genotoxic stress that is regulated by the cooperative actions of multiple p53 family members.

EJ-p53 cells (kind gift of Sam W. Lee, Harvard Medical School) were grown in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS (Hyclone), 300 lg/ml G418 (Mediatech), 100 lg/ml hygromycin B (Mediatech), and 1% penicillin/ streptomycin/L-glutamine (Invitrogen). Tetracycline (1 lg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) was added fresh to the media for every 3-4 days to maintain repression of p53 [36] . MCF-10A cells (ATCC) were grown in DMEM/F-12 (1:1 mixture, Invitrogen) supplemented with 5% horse serum (Invitrogen), 0.5 lg/ml hydrocortisone (Sigma-Aldrich), 100 ng/ml cholera toxin (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 lg/ml insulin (SigmaAldrich), 20 ng/ml EGF (Sigma-Aldrich), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin/L-glutamine. Phoenix cells (ATCC) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS (Invitrogen) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin/L-glutamine. Doxorubicin (Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in DMSO.
Retrovirus was produced in Phoenix cells and used to infect MCF-10A cells as previously described [37, 38] . Briefly, 2.5 9 10
6 Phoenix cells were transfected with 5.45 lg pLXSN retroviral expression plasmid and 0.55 lg pMD2-VSV-G (a kind gift of Ronald DePinho, Harvard Medical School) using 50 ll 2.5 M CaCl 2 and 500 ll 29 HBS, pH 7.10 with 25 lM chloroquine (Sigma-Aldrich) in the media. Retrovirus production was carried out at 32°C, and EGF was added to 20 ng/ml in addition to polybrene after 0.45 lm-filtering. Retroviral supernatant was used to infect 300,000 MCF-10A cells in 6 cm dishes for 3-5 h, then fresh media was added.
Site-directed mutagenesis Point mutations were made using the QuikChange Site Directed Mutagenesis kit (Stratagene) according to the manufacturer's protocol with the primers listed in Supplementary Table 1 . The coding sequence of wild-type p53 (GenBank NM_000546) in the pLXSN retroviral expression vector was mutated to R175H and R273H. The aBcrystallin/HspB2 promoter sequence in the pGL3 luciferase reporter vector was mutated at the 5 0 and 3 0 p53RE halfsites (the sequences of the putative wild-type and mutated p53 REs are shown in Fig. 2a Protein lysates were separated by size using SDS-PAGE and transferred to a PVDF membrane (Immobilon P, Millipore) using a semi-dry transfer apparatus. The membranes were blocked for 1 h at RT in TBS with 0.05% Tween-20 and 5% non-fat milk, incubated overnight at 4°C with the primary antibodies listed in Supplementary Table 2 , and then incubated with anti-mouse HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (Southern Biotech) for 1 h at RT. Proteins were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) assay.
RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis, and real-time PCR RNA was isolated with the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (QIA-GEN). cDNA was made from 0.5 lg total RNA with the ReactionReady First Strand Synthesis Kit (SABiosciences) according to the manufacturer's protocol. cDNA was used as template for real-time PCR with 0.4 lM each primer using the RT 2 SYBR Green/ROX PCR Master Mix (SABiosciences). Commercially available primer sets listed in Supplementary Table 3 (RT  2 qPCR Primer Set for Human genes, SABiosciences) were used to amplify the following genes: CDKN1A (p21), CRYAB (aB-crystallin), GAPDH, HSPB1 (Hsp27), HSPB2 and TP53. Primer sequences obtained from the literature (Supplementary Table 4 ) were used to amplify TAp63, DNp63, TAp73, and DNp73 [39] .
Reactions were carried out in triplicate in 384-Well Clear Optical Reaction Plates (Applied Biosystems) using a 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR Machine (Applied Biosystems) with the following thermal cycling profile: 50°C 2 min, 95°C 10 min, 409 (95°C 15 s, 60°C 1 min with fluorescence detection). SDS 2.3 software (Applied Biosystems) generated cycle threshold (C t ) values that were converted to L values by the standard curve method followed by internal normalization to the GAPDH L value.
Each fold-induction value reported is the mean of 3-6 independent experiments. siRNA oligo duplex transfection MCF-10A cells (878,000 cells in 6 cm dishes) were transfected with 100 nM ON-TARGETplus siRNA oligo duplexes targeting TP53 (Dharmacon, J-003329-14 and J-003329-15) or Non-Targeting siRNA Control #2 (Dharmacon, D-001810-02) with Oligofectamine transfection reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. EJ-p53 cells (100,000 cells per well in 6-well plates) were transfected with 5 pmol siRNA oligo duplexes using 7.5 ll Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Targeting sequences for TAp73, DNp73, and panp73 isoforms (Supplementary Table 5 ) were obtained from the literature [35, 40] .
EJ-p53 cells (630,000 cells in 6 cm dishes) were transfected with 2.21 lg pcDNA3 expression plasmid DNA using Lipofectamine 2000.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed according to the EZChIP kit (Upstate) protocol. Briefly, EJ-p53 cells were plated at 4.5 9 10 6 cells per 15 cm dish. The cells were then lysed at a final concentration of 2.5 9 10 7 cells/ml. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) lysates were sonicated on ice with 15 cycles of 10 s ON/20 s OFF using a microtip probe with a sonicator (Fisher Sonic Dismembrator). For each IP, 5 lg antibody was added to *1 9 10 7 cells of pre-cleared input lysate. The DO-1 p53 mouse monoclonal antibody was used for p53 ChIP, and normal mouse IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies) was used as a negative control. The DNA was eluted into 50 ll Elution Buffer with the PCR Purification kit (QIAGEN). One ll DNA was assayed by real-time PCR as described earlier. The primer sequences used are listed in Supplementary Table 6 . Dilutions of the 2% input DNA were used to generate a standard curve.
The human aB-crystallin gene is juxtaposed head-to-head with the related sHSP, HspB2 on chromosome 11q22.3-q23.1. The two genes share an 1,111 base pair intergenic promoter that is transcribed in an orientation-dependent fashion to allow for differential gene regulation [41, 42] . In searching the aB-crystallin/HspB2 promoter for DNAbinding elements that might be utilized by stress-induced transcription factors, we found a sequence at -199/-169 (relative to the aB-crystallin transcription start site) that closely matches the consensus sequence for a p53 response element (p53RE) (Fig. 1a) [43, 44] . This putative p53RE is highly conserved across mammals and features two p53RE half-sites separated by 11 base pairs that match the consensus sequence at 17/20 bases, including the required cytosines and guanines at positions 4 and 7 in each halfsite, respectively. The presence of this putative p53RE in the shared aB-crystallin/HspB2 promoter suggests that aBcrystallin or HspB2 might be transcriptionally regulated by p53. Half-site Half-site Fig. 1 The shared aB-crystallin and HspB2 promoter contains a putative p53 response element (p53RE), and p53 induces aB-crystallin expression. a Schematic representation of the shared intergenic aB-crystallin and HspB2 promoter. The sequence -199/-169 relative to the aB-crystallin transcriptional start site is shown compared to the p53RE consensus sequence. Vertical lines indicate the base pairs in the human sequence half-sites that match the consensus sequence, and bases conserved among human, mouse, and rat are highlighted in gray. R, purine; Y, pyrimidine; W, A or T. b and c EJ-p53 cells were grown in the presence or absence of tetracycline, and mRNA and protein were collected at the indicated times. b p53 (triangles), p21 (inverted triangles), aB-crystallin (squares), and Hsp27 (diamonds) mRNA levels were measured by real-time RT-PCR and are shown as fold induction relative to the level before induction. Statistical significance was determined by two-way ANOVA with a Bonferroni post-test and is noted for the fold-induction value compared to the initial value. * P \ 0.05, ** P \ 0.01, *** P \ 0.001. c p53, p21, aB-crystallin, and tubulin protein levels were assayed by immunoblotting. d MCF-10A cells were infected with wild-type p53 or empty pLXSN retrovirus, and protein was collected at the indicated times. p53, p21, aB-crystallin, and tubulin levels were determined by immunoblotting. e MCF-10A cells were mock infected or infected with empty vector, N-FLAG-tagged wildtype p53, untagged wild-type p53, R175H p53, or R273H p53 pLXSN retrovirus. Forty-eight hours later, p53, aB-crystallin, and actin protein levels were assayed by immunoblotting. f MCF-10A cells were transfected with siRNAs targeting p53 (sip53-14 or sip53-15) or luciferase (NS). Sixteen hours later, the cells were treated with 500 nM doxorubicin or DMSO vehicle. Forty-eight hours later, p53, p21, aB-crystallin, HspB2, and tubulin expressions were determined by immunoblotting. Positive control lysates (C) were used for immunoblotting
To determine whether aB-crystallin or HspB2 is induced by p53, we utilized an inducible p53 expression system (EJ-p53 cells) in which wild-type p53 expression is induced by tetracycline removal in p53-null human EJ bladder carcinoma cells [36] . Upon removal of tetracycline from the media, p53 and p21 mRNA levels increased rapidly within 12 h (Fig. 1b) . Moreover, aB-crystallin mRNA levels were dramatically increased, although the induction of aB-crystallin mRNA, which was first apparent 24 h after tetracycline removal, was delayed compared to that of p53 or p21. Importantly, mRNA levels of the related sHSP Hsp27 were unchanged (Fig. 1b) , and HspB2 mRNA levels were at the lower limit of detection or undetectable at all time points examined (data not shown). These results indicate that the aB-crystallin gene is specifically and robustly induced by p53. Immunoblotting of whole cell lysates collected in parallel confirmed rapid p53-dependent induction of p21 protein levels within 12 h and delayed induction of aB-crystallin protein levels within 48 h (Fig. 1c) . Similar results were obtained when wild-type p53 was expressed by retroviral transduction in immortalized human MCF-10A breast epithelial cells (Fig. 1d) , indicating that the observed induction of aB-crystallin protein by p53 is not cell type specific. In contrast, retroviral delivery of p53 DNA-binding mutants (R175H and R273H) into MCF-10A cells did not induce aB-crystallin protein (Fig. 1e) , thereby confirming that the induction of aB-crystallin by p53 is mediated by a transcriptional mechanism. To determine whether genotoxic stress induces aB-crystallin by a p53-dependent mechanism, we transfected MCF-10A cells with two different p53 siRNAs (sip53-14 and sip53-15) or control non-silencing siRNA (NS) targeting luciferase and then treated the cells with the topoisomerase II inhibitor doxorubicin (Fig. 1f) . Fortyeight hours later, p53, p21, and aB-crystallin protein levels were greatly increased in NS-transfected MCF-10A cells treated with doxorubicin (lane 9) compared to NS-transfected cells treated with DMSO vehicle (lane 6). In contrast, siRNAs targeting p53 (sip53-14 and to a lesser extent sip53-15) partly inhibited p53 induction and dramatically suppressed p21 and aB-crystallin induction by doxorubicin (lanes 10 and 11 vs. lane 9). Collectively, these data indicate that p53 is required for aB-crystallin induction in response to genotoxic stress.
We next investigated whether the putative p53RE in the aB-crystallin promoter is transactivated by p53. To this end, EJ-p53 cells were transiently transfected with luciferase reporters containing the full-length aB-crystallin promoter (-1,081/?30) or progressive 5 0 truncations that contained (-289/?30) or lacked (-171/?30) the putative p53RE (Fig. 2a) . In addition, the conserved cytosine and guanine residues in both half-sites of the putative p53RE were mutated in the full-length and -289/?30 truncated promoter constructs; mutation of these sites in p53REs abrogates p53 binding [43, 44] . When p53 was induced in the EJ-p53 cells by tetracycline removal, the fulllength and -289/?30 aB-crystallin promoter reporters mediated 10.5-and 7-fold increased luciferase activities, respectively, compared to the promoter-less pGL3-Basic luciferase vector. Mutation of the putative p53RE in the full-length and -289/?30 promoter constructs attenuated p53 transactivation of these reporters. Similarly, deletion of the putative p53RE in the -171/?30 aBcrystallin promoter reporter completely abrogated p53 activation of the promoter. These data demonstrate that p53 activates the aB-crystallin promoter through the putative p53RE.
In order to determine whether p53 binds to the putative p53RE in vivo, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were performed. ChIP with anti-p53 antibodies enriched for p21 5 0 p53RE genomic DNA as expected (Fig. 2b) , confirming that the ChIP assay worked. In contrast, no enrichment of aB-crystallin promoter genomic DNA was seen. While it is formally possible that p53 may be binding to the aB-crystallin promoter in a manner not detectable by ChIP, these data strongly suggest that p53 does not directly bind to the putative p53RE in the aBcrystallin promoter. Together with the delayed kinetics of aB-crystallin induction by p53 compared to p21 (Fig. 1b,  c) , these results suggest an indirect mechanism of transactivation whereby p53 induces the expression of other target genes, such as p63 or p73, which also bind to p53REs to regulate gene expression.
In order to investigate the potential role of the p53 family network in aB-crystallin transactivation, we first determined p63 and p73 mRNA levels following wild-type p53 induction in EJ-p53 cells. TAp63 mRNA levels were initially low and unaffected by p53 induction, while DNp63 mRNA levels were undetectable at all time points (data not shown). TAp73 mRNA levels showed a modest transient increase at 6 h with and without p53 induction (Fig. 3a) . In contrast, DNp73 mRNA levels increased dramatically upon p53 expression (Fig. 3b) , consistent with previous reports showing that DNp73 is a p53 target gene [20, 45, 46] . The observed induction of DNp73 suggests that DNp73 may serve as an intermediary factor between p53 expression and aB-crystallin transactivation. To test this hypothesis, we examined the requirement for p73 in the p53-dependent induction of aB-crystallin. Pan p73, TAp73, and DNp73 siRNAs inhibited p53 induction of aB-crystallin mRNA levels, indicating that both TAp73 and DNp73 are required for p53-dependent transactivation of aB-crystallin (Fig. 3c) . Intriguingly, the TAp73 siRNA suppressed DNp73 mRNA induction by p53, suggesting that TAp73 is required for p53-mediated DNp73 transactivation. Importantly, the p73 siRNAs had modest or no effect on p53, p21, and Mdm2 mRNA levels following p53 induction, indicating that p73 RNAi does not globally disrupt p53-mediated transcription (Fig. 3d) . Collectively, these results implicate one or more p73 isoforms in the observed p53-dependent transactivation of aB-crystallin.
In order to specifically determine which p73 isoform(s) transactivate aB-crystallin, EJ-p53 cells were transiently transfected with N-terminal HA-tagged TAp73a, TAp73b, DNp73a, DNp73b, and untagged DNp73b-13 expression constructs. DNp73b-13 lacks the N-terminal 13 amino acids unique to DNp73 that are required for transactivation by DNp73b [30] . Immunoblotting confirmed that the p73 isoforms are expressed 24 and 48 h after transfection (Fig. 4a) . Although ectopic expression of most of the p73 isoforms had little effect on aB-crystallin mRNA levels, DNp73a increased aB-crystallin mRNA 11-and 17-fold at 24 and 48 h, respectively (Fig. 4b) . Taken together, these data strongly support a model whereby p53 transactivates DNp73a which, in turn, induces aB-crystallin expression.
We have demonstrated for the first time that the molecular chaperone aB-crystallin is induced by a novel collaborative relationship among p53 and multiple p73 isoforms. Specifically, p53 leads to the robust transactivation of DNp73, which subsequently induces aB-crystallin gene expression by a p53-independent mechanism. Although DNp73a is a well-established dominant negative inhibitor of p53 and TAp73 [20, 45, 47] , it has also been implicated in p53-dependent and p53-independent transcriptional regulation of a variety of target genes, including EGR1 and BTG2 [29, 31] . As is the case with aB-crystallin, the mechanisms by which DNp73a transactivates these genes is unclear but may involve a direct interaction (e.g., as a transcriptional co-activator) or indirect mechanism (e.g., by repressing a negative transcriptional regulator or activating a positive regulator of the target gene). Interestingly, ectopic expression of DNp73a has been reported to induce HSF-1 expression, thereby providing a potential indirect mechanism for aB-crystallin transactivation by DNp73a [48] . Our Fig. 2 The putative p53RE mediates p53-dependent activation of the aB-crystallin promoter without binding p53. a The top line schematically depicts the shared aB-crystallin/HspB2 promoter. The transcriptional start sites of aB-crystallin and HspB2 are indicated by bent arrows; open-ended boxes depict coding sequences. Below, the portion of the promoter upstream of the firefly luciferase-coding sequence in each of the pGL3 reporter constructs is displayed. The indicated point mutations in the putative p53RE in the aB-crystallin promoter (highlighted in gray) were introduced to abrogate wild-type p53 protein binding. EJ-p53 cells transfected with 100 ng of wildtype, truncated, or p53RE-mutated aB-crystallin promoter luciferase reporter, and 100 pg of a Renilla luciferase reporter was induced to express p53 for 24 h. Firefly luciferase activity was normalized to Renilla luciferase activity and is indicated relative to promoter-less pGL3-Basic sample activity. For wild-type p53RE samples, statistical significance (two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test) is noted for the difference compared to the promoter-less pGL3-Basic construct (labeled '0'). For the mutated p53RE samples, statistical significance is noted for differences compared to wild-type p53RE. *** P \ 0.001. b EJ-p53 cells after 24 h with or without p53 induction were assayed by p53 ChIP for binding of p53 to the aB-crystallin promoter. ChIP-isolated DNA was assayed by realtime RT-PCR with primers flanking the putative p53REs in the aB-crystallin or p21 promoters. The fraction of input chromatin (%INPUT) immunoprecipitated was calculated by the standard curve method. Statistical significance (two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test) is noted for %INPUT differences between p53 and IgG ChIP under each condition. * P \ 0.05 αB-crystallin HspB2 00 observation that silencing TAp73 inhibits the induction of DNp73 by p53 adds another layer of complexity. These results suggest that TAp73 cooperates with p53 to transactivate DNp73 in this system, a plausible scenario given that TAp73 itself has been demonstrated to transactivate DNp73 [49] . Collectively, our data point to an intricate and tightly coordinated cooperation between p53, TAp73 and DNp73 in the transcriptional regulation of aB-crystallin in response to genotoxic stress.
The induction of aB-crystallin, an anti-apoptotic and anti-oxidant protein [4, [6] [7] [8] [9] , by genotoxic stress may also serve a homeostatic function to suppress apoptosis and reduce ROS levels in the setting of DNA damage. Indeed, recent studies indicate that p53 induces the expression of several pro-survival and anti-oxidant genes, including COX-2, the sestrins, TIGAR, glutathione peroxidase 1, aldehyde dehydrogenase 4 family member A1, and receptor tyrosine kinase DDR1 [50] [51] [52] [53] [54] [55] . Induction of anti-oxidant genes by p53 inhibits tumor initiation by reducing ROS levels, which can cause oxidative DNA damage and promote genomic instability [56] . Transactivation of aBcrystallin downstream of p53 represents a potentially novel mechanism of countering pro-apoptotic and pro-oxidant signaling initiated by genotoxic stress, a hypothesis we will explore in future studies. Intriguingly, aB-crystallin was also recently reported to bind p53 and sequester it in the cytoplasm, suggesting an additional mechanism by which aB-crystallin may inhibit p53 signaling [57] .
Our results also provide potentially new insights into the mechanisms of deregulated expression of aB-crystallin in cancer. The cytoprotective function of aB-crystallin has been exploited by diverse cancers, which constitutively express aB-crystallin to overcome apoptosis. For instance, aB-crystallin is aberrantly expressed in apoptosis-resistant triple negative (estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2/ErbB2-negative) breast tumors and glioblastoma multiforme and contributes to their aggressive tumor biology [8, 37, 58] . Furthermore, expression of aB-crystallin correlates with poor survival in several malignancies, including breast cancer, head and neck cancer, and hepatocellular carcinoma [37, [59] [60] [61] . Although p53 is frequently inactivated in cancer, DNp73 is commonly expressed in a wide range of clinically aggressive human tumors and is associated with poor outcomes [24] [25] [26] [27] . Given the novel link between DNp73 and aB-crystallin we have demonstrated, it will be important in future studies to determine whether DNp73 and aB-crystallin are coexpressed in human tumors and whether they cooperate in tumor initiation and/or progression. 
One and a half million people work in the UK construction industry and it is known that its workers are among the highest risk occupational groups for lower respiratory disease, pneumoconiosis, skin disease, musculoskeletal disorders of the back and for trauma and poisoning. 1 
2 In addition, the construction industry has poor occupational health service provision in the UK despite its workers being exposed to many harmful substances (e.g., dusts, fumes, gases, toxic chemicals), biological hazards {e.g., acute and chronic infections, parasites) and physical hazards (e.g., noise, heat, cold, vibration, inflammable materials, compressed air). 3 Construction work is usually subcontracted by large, international organizations, to contractors who may then subcontract to smaller labour-only suppliers. Findings from previous research by the authors 45 con-easily solvable) problem of safety. Some of the reasons for this include: health is a complex issue; long term strategies are required; benefits are not immediate and are consequently difficult to demonstrate; exposure to hazards with different health risks can be multiple and vary in nature and level; it has a low profile; the 'macho culture' inherent in the workforce; the mobile and temporary workforce and a lack of health expertise within the industry. 6 Indeed, in a survey of 63 line and senior managers in the construction industry, it was found that there was a clear perception of the manager's role in injury prevention, but less clarity of their role in the prevention of ill-health. 7 Also, the urgent need for effective health management is diminished by the fact that generally there is no statutory requirement for health standards to be reached (with obvious exceptions, e.g., radiation, asbestos and lead).
The financial burden of many occupational illnesses/disabilities is largely borne by individual victims and the general public, i.e., taxation pays for the costs of the actual health treatment and any allowances (temporary or permanent). For example, drawing on data from two large surveys, the costs of work-related illness in 1990 to society, victims and employers were £4.53-4.72 billion, £2.72 billion and £0.61-0.74 billion respectively. 8 However, over recent years there has been a large increase in the direct costs to employers of work-related ill-health. For example, employees made three times more claims against their employers in 1993 than in 1988 across all industry. 8 Reasons for this include early diagnosis of conditions, better causal identification, employee awareness of legal rights and increased trade union support in pursuing claims against employers.
Health surveillance involves the identification of the early signs of work-related ill-health through systems which include keeping health records and conducting health checks. Surveillance data are used to determine the need for occupational safety and health action and to plan, implement and evaluate interventions and programmes. 9 It is widely acknowledged that in the construction industry, adequate health surveillance is not available and that early signs of work-related health problems are not identified.
There is an urgent need to address the extent, causes and management of the problem of occupational illhealth in the construction industry and to improve the health culture. This investigation develops the research reported previously. 5 The aim is to establish the extent of existing health and welfare provision, health surveillance activities and health information collected and establish its use and role in developing prevention strategies.
Case studies were used to explore how companies were addressing health issues on seven UK sites. One experienced researcher conducted all of the interviews between November 1996 and March 1997. Wider surveys have been undertaken, 7 but few investigations have attempted to study health management in detail.
As with the previous investigation, 5 the research involved the engineering construction sector, i.e., the construction activities of the process, power and energy industries, where health management is likely to be most rigorous. In addition, focus on the engineering construction sector (and choice of sites) was due to availability of access through the European Construction Institute (ECI), with the justification that the performance of these large, high profile organizations is likely to represent current best practice in the UK. ECI is a pan-European and pan-construction organization comprising clients, designers, contractors and trade associations. Although job titles varied between companies, interviewees were generally corporate health and safety advisors, site health and safety advisors, nurses and line managers on site at the time of the visit and employed by either the client or major contractor. In all cases the major contractor was the organization with overall responsibility for construction activities, but the specific contractual arrangements differed in each project.
The interviews were semi-structured in nature, guided by carefully prepared questions and issues to be explored to reflect the basic research question, but where neither the wording nor the exact order of questions, were pre-determined. The majority of the questions were 'open-ended' for flexibility and depth of information. The interviews were also exploratory, allowing discussion around health issues to evolve. Consequently some of the interview dialogue reflected the views of experienced individuals rather than those of a particular company. A summary of the central questions and issues explored during the interviews is shown in Table 1 . Copies of any relevant material such as health questionnaires, checklists, policies, etc. were gathered, site walkabouts were conducted and relevant meetings were attended to enrich information obtained from the interviews. The interviews took place over 1-2 days and were recorded on audiotape, transcribed by the researcher and then erased, assuring anonymity and confidentiality. Several techniques were used to ensure truth-value or credibility of the work. 10 Triangulation supports credibility by using multiple data sources to provide insights about the same events. For example, when considering the construction sites' health and welfare facilities, planning/proposal documents were examined and the reactions of workers, health staff and safety managers to these facilities were noted. Observation (on site) also provided further confirmation. In addition, member checking allowed the interviewees to respond to interpretations from the interview, for example, by verifying conclusions from earlier work, challenging interview summaries, providing written comments on the contents of resulting reports and by discussing the results during ECI task force meetings.
Due to the diversity of sites, project size, project stage, etc., the results are presented in the form of case studies from which points are drawn out for discussion. The details regarding project cost, manhours, etc. are not included to protect the identity of the companies. The term 'green-field site' is used when there has been no previous construction, no demolition and the building work is not within an existing facility. The sample sites indicate the range of construction activities in the UK engineering construction sector at the time of the study.
The case studies represent current practice and expert judgements of the interviewees on a range of health issues in the construction industry. This 'snapshot' account reflects the position of large, high profile organizations, which it was judged by the research team are more likely to be proactive in terms of health management. The study must be placed in this context. The range of case study sites is shown in Table 2 and general health and welfare provision on these sites is summarized in Table 3 . A fully equipped clinic set up by the main contractor with a full-time RGN.
In line with and above regulations (WCs, sinks, canteen, drying rooms).
In line with and above regulations (WCs, sinks, canteen, drying rooms).
In line with and above regulations (WCs, sinks and drying rooms).
Mobile facilities (WCs and sinks) -mobile drying rooms and showers were difficult to arrange.
Excellent welfare facilities including hand wash areas, eye wash areas, showers, canteen and industrial chaplain. Contract workers had their own building with canteen, offices and car park.
In line with and above regulations (WCs, sinks and drying rooms).
In line with and above regulations (WCs, sinks, lockers, and canteen), however no showers or drying rooms.
* This facility was not available for use by contract staff except for more serious accident injuries. N.B. All sites had first aid facilities, trained first aiders (in line with and above regulations) and emergency accident/health procedures.
Considering health data, all of the sites routinely collected first aid, over-3-day lost time injury data and RIDDOR reportable accidents and illnesses. Only one client and one of the major contractors were starting to collect health-related absence data on their subcontracted workers. Both of these organizations felt that there was not yet 100% reporting of occupational health-related lost time and that the system relied on the honesty and efficiency of individual contractors. These data were forwarded to a central location for collation, analysis of sickness absence trends and subsequent reports. The other four major contractors only collected this information if the individual employee visited the nurse (where available). A client representative interviewed indicated that currently there were no clear systems or frameworks in place to monitor health in either their own employees or their contractors. This research investigated the health surveillance procedures on the case study sites and within case study organizations. In some cases operatives or company staff had medicals or health checks on other projects or when working for other organizations, usually to fulfil the statutory requirements for specific workers, e.g., radiation workers. However, for the majority of subcontracted workers there appears to be no consistent approach to health management, emphasizing the need for an industry-wide standard.
Case study 1 (400-1,400 employees). The interviews took place during the final year of a four-year greenfield construction site for the building of a PowerStation where the client was closely involved on site. Interviewees were a client line manager, the site health and safety manager and a Registered General Nurse (RGN) with 5 years experience in occupational health. The latter two were both employed by the main contractor.
The full time RGN and retained occupational health physician were available to all site employees. All site employees completed a health assessment questionnaire at the start of their employment and any health concerns admitted were followed up. Pre-employment medicals and health surveillance were not undertaken for site employees. The site nurse suspected that the majority of subcontracted workers concealed information regarding their health to avoid questions raised about their fitness for work, despite confidentiality being assured. It was considered that her role was more reactive than proactive, i.e., workers visited her in the clinic for treatments. She did not attend health and safety meetings or accompany health and safety professionals on site walkabouts, although she felt that her role could be more proactive, e.g., she could advise on manual handling, sun protection, health risk assessment and check the welfare facilities (toilets, wash areas).
This site nurse thought that generally workers did not have an interest in health, e.g., protecting their skin from irritants, but that given time, encouragement and confidentiality workers would discuss their concerns. In support of this, it had been noticed that visits to the first aid facility by site managers, workers, etc. had increased and there was less stigma attached to them.
Regarding the management of health, difficulties were expressed as being the high cost to the industry, overall monitoring and maintaining confidentiality.
Finally, when asked for ideas concerning how the health of subcontractors could be managed, a form of 'swipe-card' system that workers carried, containing details of medicals, surveillance, work history, etc. was suggested.
Case study 2 (maximum of 600 employees). The interviews were carried out during the final year of a three-year green-field construction site of two sewage treatment plants. The client was not closely involved on these sites. Interviewees were the two site safety officers (with responsibility for health) employed by the main contractor.
No occupational health nurse was appointed to these sites, although the health and safety managers felt that, in retrospect, this was an omission. These projects involved work on contaminated land and airborne bacteria had been identified as a health risk. From the interviewees' perspective it was suspected that in some instances workers were abusing 'the seriousness' that was placed on this bacteria to take time off from work and they considered that a nurse may have been able to contribute to the validation of these claims. Preemployment questionnaires, medicals or health surveillance were not undertaken for site employees.
The lifestyle of the 'travelling workers' living away from home, which involved alcohol consumption, late nights, poor food and accommodation lead one of the managers to conclude that generally construction workers did not take care of their health and that attitudes were not changing. However it is of interest that on this particular site with the risk of airborne bacteria, workers were very diligent at washing their hands, wearing protective clothing, dressing all cuts, etc.
The high cost inherent in health management was the main concern of the safety officers, although evidence for this was anecdotal. Construction is a competitive industry and there was a fear that the UK could fall behind countries that do not have such 'restrictive' practices. In addition, the client would ultimately pay and as clients are generally the service industries, this cost would be passed on to the end user. There was also a belief that it was unrealistic (as well as too expensive) for the industry to be managing the general health and well-being of this transient work force: individuals needed to take responsibility for their own health.
Concerning the future management of the health of their contractors, the idea of establishing a central, computerized system was thought to be a possible solution. Subscribing companies would pay a registration and an annual fee for the central management of the health of the construction work force. This could take the form of a 'passport' type system where medicals, surveillance, check-ups, health training, etc. were routinely co-ordinated. As all companies were ultimately using the same pool of labour, the current employer of an individual worker would pay the costs of any medicals due during that employment.
Case study 3 (50-60 employees) . The interviews took place halfway though a two-year, new process building construction project on the existing factory site where the client was in close contact. Interviewees were all employed by the main contractor and comprised a corporate health and safety advisor, the site manager and the site safety advisor (with responsibility for health).
The client-run medical centre employed a full-time RGN and an occupational health physician one day a week for their own employees. However, this facility was only available to contractors for more serious accident injuries, which the trained first aiders on the construction site were unable to handle. Contractors were not encouraged to use the centre for other health reasons, medicals or health surveillance as this was not included in the project costs and would therefore be an additional expense for the client. Pre-employment questionnaires, medicals or health surveillance were not undertaken for workers on this construction site.
Once again the attitude of. workers to their health was felt to be poor, i.e., not interested in sun protection, skin care, good lifting practice, etc. It was thought unlikely that workers would take the initiative to arrange their own medical assessments/health surveillance with occupational health professionals. Although in one manager's experience, older, fit workers would be likely to have a medical, as it would be in their interest to prove their fitness for work.
It was expressed that any health management system would be difficult to implement due to the suspicion that it would create regarding possible job loss: prospective employees may conceal information about their health in order to secure employment.
Once again the creation of a 'passport' system was cited as the way forward for the future management of health. For example, extending the 'Safety Passport Scheme' managed by the Engineering Construction Industry Training Board (ECITB) on behalf of clients, to all workers and to include health as well as safety training information.
The interviews took place during the early preparation and administration stage of a 12-month green-field site-laying 27 km of gas pipeline with the client on site. The individual pipes were 18 x 1.5 metres and weighed 14 tonnes. The site safety manager (with responsibility for health) was interviewed.
There was no plan to employ an occupational health nurse or to install a treatment room at the site base. As the work on this site was distributed along the pipeline, and continually changing location, efforts were being made to ensure trained first aiders and medical kits were available to each team of workers. Pre-employment questionnaires, medicals or health surveillance would not be undertaken for workers on this site.
This manager felt that the specialist group of 'high risk' workers involved in pipe-laying took a greater interest in their health, than those in general engineering construction, with regard to wearing sun protection, clothing, ear protection and gloves. However, it was considered unlikely that workers would organize medicals or health monitoring for themselves.
Once again there was a fear that the management of health in the transient work force would be difficult and expensive, such that the UK may lose its competitive edge with companies/countries not requiring or achieving such high standards in health management.
It was established that these pipelayers were mostly a stable work force, as the same team moved from site to site for employment. Consequently the management of health in this group of workers and similar groups (e.g., tunnellers) was perceived to be less complicated.
The interviews took place in an existing PowerStation. It was a client operation with contractor involvement in routine maintenance, breakdown maintenance and outage work (every 18 months, whereby the plant was shut down for a more thorough service). A corporate health and safety advisor, the occupational health nurse (Diploma in Occupational Health) and a site health and safety officer (all employed by the client) were interviewed.
This client ran a fully equipped medical centre for their own employees with a full-time occupational health nurse, a temporary RGN when required and a physiotherapist 1.5 days/week. A local GP and the company Chief Medical Officer also visited monthly. However, once again this facility was not available for any contract staff except in the case of a serious accident or acute illness. Contractors requiring medicals, etc. had to visit local GPs. Pre-employment questionnaires, medicals and health surveillance were undertaken for client employees and for certain categories of risk workers, e.g., radiation workers and heat-stress workers. The view was put forward that health professionals addressed very different issues to site safety officers, therefore the occupational health nurse's attendance and contribution to the Health and Safety Committee meetings was valued.
It was considered that workers on this and similar sites with possible exposure to radiation took an interest in taking care of their health.
Problems regarding the health management of contracted workers were perceived to be the costs involved, quantification and the need to persuade top management to build for the future with up-front investment. The increased modular nature of the work would also result in more contractors and less control over the work force. It was felt that health should be costed into a project but that these costs would be high as medicals and surveillance are time consuming and cannot be rushed.
A way forward for the management of health was once again thought to be a 'swipe-card' system similar to that already used by this company for radiation dose reviews.
Case study 6 (6, 000 contract employees at the time of the  interview) . The interviews took place in the final year of a nine-year tunnelling project with close client involvement. In addition to the above, the project also employed 1,000 personnel on the project management team. The client safety and quality manager (with responsibility for health) on this project was interviewed.
This client ran its own fully equipped medical facility for employees with doctors and nursing staff. Contractors were responsible for their own provision of health care on site but the client health and safety advisor suspected a wide variation in standard of care, i.e., medical facilities, health surveillance offered. The client did not insist on contractors' compliance with pre-set standards/procedures of health management (with the exception of statuary requirements). It was also highlighted that their own medical staff were probably not familiar with dealing with the occupational health problems specific to construction activities, as they mainly dealt with office workers. Equally, it was felt that construction management professionals generally do not have a good appreciation of occupational health hazards and therefore were unable to appreciate the benefits of 'expensive' experts, i.e., doctors and nurses. For example construction managers may feel that they do not need the medical profession to be involved in risk assessments, manual handling training, hearing tests, etc.
Once again the work environment was regarded anecdotally to be a 'macho' culture, but also that gradually workers were becoming more aware of the need to take care of their health, e.g., by wearing gloves. Health education was thought to originate from increased general public awareness rather than from any management activities. It was considered that employers do have a role in prevention of occupational ill-health but it was admitted that currently management awareness/interest was poor.
Several issues were raised regarding the problem of health management. Firstly, it was difficult as a client to enforce high standards for health provision on contractors, when the benefits were not immediate and with the need to cut costs in the industry. Also, as a client it would be necessary to balance the desirable outcomes with what the whole industry could actually deliver. There was also fear that regular medicals may take away livelihoods (e.g., workers with dermatitis, deafness or back pain) and that eventually there would be no one to do the job. Finally, problems in persuading designers to consider health issues in construction D. E. Gyi el al.: OH management in the engineering construction industry 269 design when safety was still high on the agenda were anticipated.
It was pointed out that the framework for health management was already in place (from the legislation) and therefore the way forward was considered to be a slow 'war of attrition' in a similar way to the management of safety, i.e., continual communication to workers and their managers, emphasizing the importance of occupational health. As a client they were only just beginning to take the initiative and consider health, e.g., by focusing their site Safety Management Award Scheme on health. In addition, they were examining the effectiveness of their management of health in their own employees, introducing medicals at the start and end of employment, and were generally raising health awareness. This approach would eventually provide them with the skills to enable them to review how well contractors were managing the health of their employees. The difficulties this could bring were appreciated but they felt that ultimately contractors would be expected to manage their subcontractors' health and that the client's role would be to advise and set standards. A concern was however expressed that with better records companies could be opening themselves up for litigation and that this may be seen by some as a disincentive to take a more proactive role in health surveillance.
The interviews took place approximately halfway into a 21-month green-field construction site involving the extension of an existing PowerStation. A corporate health and safety manager, the site safety manager (with responsibility for health) and the RGN (all employed by the main contractor) were interviewed.
The clinic employed a full-time RGN that all site employees could visit whether the health problem was work-related or not. Once again her role was more reactive than proactive. As a female in a mainly male environment and unused to construction activities, she admitted that she did not feel comfortable walking around the site unaccompanied. Once again preemployment questionnaires, medicals or health surveillance were not undertaken for workers on this site.
Workers were reported to exhibit variable attitudes and behaviours with regard to health, which was felt to be due to individual personalities rather than age, race, etc., although awareness of specific risks was thought to be improving, e.g., wearing gloves to protect the skin. With regard to medicals, it was indicated that workers who were 'fit' would co-operate, however, workers with any health problems would not, because of fear of job loss.
Cost was once again raised as the main concern regarding health management of this 'maze' of contractors with its mobile work force. Margins were already considered tight in the industry and there was a fear that the requirement of pricing health into contracts could reduce the competitive edge. It was admitted that it was unlikely that health management would be industry lead and that more specific legislation would be required, which clients/major contractors in turn would need to enforce.
A possibility for the future management of health was suggested involving the clients and major contractors sharing 'core contractors' to form a nucleus of steady workers. Costs would then be shared to maintain these workers with regard to medicals and surveillance. It was expressed that the industry needs to be seen to care about individuals and to be doing something for their benefit.
As a possible health issue, companies were asked the extent of screening for alcohol and substance abuse. Whilst all the organizations had policies to cover alcohol and substance abuse, none conducted postaccident, random or pre-hire screening on their construction sites. Although these interviewees were unaware of the extent of the problem, they were uncomfortable about enforcing any formal surveillance system (with breathalysers/blood tests) due to concern over breaching civil rights. However, should alcohol be discovered on site or an employee be suspected of consuming alcohol or drugs, they would immediately be removed from site and disciplinary procedures would commence. This fact is specifically addressed during the induction of workers. Individual alcohol and drug intake (with its wider effects) were only discussed as part of medicals, and as previously reported, the large group of subcontracted workers were not covered by this.
This paper considers seven case studies of the interviewees' perceptions of the existing situation with regard to health management. In so far as they represent the views of the UK engineering construction industry, the implications are striking. Data/records collected regarding absence and health in subcontracted workers were limited and inconsistent, with little systematic analysis. The majority of companies only examined the data if a problem had occurred. Since data and records are an important part of any health management system, it is not surprising that prevention strategies (health assessments, medicals and health surveillance) had not been developed for workers at risk.
Pre-employment questionnaires, medicals and health surveillance were not widespread among these organizations for either their own staff or any contracted workers. In a postal survey of 5,000 employers from across all industry, it was found that only 31% of companies who had identified at least one serious hazard at work were performing pre-employment medicals and 29% were carrying out health surveil-lance." It is suspected that figures for the construction industry would be even lower.
As identified in other work 7 these case studies also found a clear perception of construction managements' role in safety and the prevention of injury, but less clarity regarding the prevention of ill-health. Nevertheless, managers did have concerns about the health of their work force and were aware of the health risks in construction activities. The familiar and practical issues of resourcing occupational health management in the competitive construction environment; the numbers of temporary workers; the multi-contracted and mobile work force and a lack of interest by workers, possibly fuelled by the fear of job loss, were all raised as barriers to solutions. However, despite the often quoted 'mobility' and 'high turnover' of subcontracted labour, the work force mostly consists of the same group of core workers, who have been in the industry for years, rotating between contractors and projects. 12 It was argued by respondents that there needs to be a balance between what is desirable and what the industry (including the smaller contractors) can realistically begin to deliver.
The practice of employing an occupational health nurse specifically for construction site workers was not consistent. Two of the construction sites had a dedicated RGN for use by all employees including contracted workers, but although experienced in occupational health, these nurses did not have formal qualifications in occupational health. Three of the sites had a client-run Medical Centre which could only be used by contracted workers in emergencies and the other two sites had no health professionals, only trained first aiders. Although site size is a factor, one health and safety advisor cited that a general lack of understanding of health hazards and the failure to recognize the potential of the occupational health nurse in health and safety on a construction site, could be reasons for this. Interestingly, research" has found that a doctor or nurse performed only 26% of 'inspections for readily detectable conditions'. Also, although 53% of 'enquiries about symptoms, inspection and examination' involved doctors or nurses, 38% of these were attributed to doctors and only 14% to nurses. It seems that many organizations (not just construction) have a limited perception of the extended role of the occupational health nurse in health and safety. In turn, occupational health professionals must promote the contribution they can make to health management. 13 Unfortunately, findings from this and our previous research have indicated that the construction industry is unlikely to begin to address health management specifically, without outside influence. However, the need to redress the balance between health and safety was recognized by these interviewees. Generally smaller companies do not have highly developed management systems, therefore it is the role of large organizations to provide support and take the lead in implementing health management systems. It should be remembered that over 50% of site workers are self-employed, 14 although this may change with recent legislation imposing stricter rules on self-employment and PAYE. 15 Cost-benefit analysis of health management is difficult to conduct but studies often indicate that medical examinations, health surveillance, etc. are expensive.
The essential issues for employers are the actual costs of investing in health and safety, and the benefits likely to be achieved in the short, medium and long term. 16 However, benefits such as higher productivity, improved morale, fewer compensation claims, greater control of hazards and confidence from insurers, will always be difficult to quantify in the short, medium and even long term. As highlighted by one health and safety manager, convincing top management of the benefits of an occupational health service will continue to be difficult. Nevertheless, large financial savings were demonstrated as a result of reductions in the average duration of sickness absence, by ensuring early referral of employees with longer term sickness absence to the occupational health departments. 17 Risk assessment determines the degree of risk employees face from exposure to hazards at work and can help establish what is necessary to control the risk and to protect health. These participating organizations were already undertaking risk assessments for certain health hazards, encouraged considerably by the need to comply with recent legislation, e.g., COSHH. Broadening risk assessment to identify specific short and long term health hazards (as well as safety) could be the way forward for the industry, driving targeted and effective health management. It must also be remembered that workers have a key part to play in the management of their own health, facilitated by the provision of education and training as part of the health management system. Alcohol and drug use was generally perceived to be difficult areas to enforce control and to judge the extent of the problem in the UK. Added to this, was a hesitance by the majority of the interviewees to formalize any monitoring systems, e.g., breathalysers and screening. The psychosocial issues surrounding alcohol and drug abuse in site workers were not generally addressed.
Finally, all the interviewees advocated the development of central management of the health (and safety) of the large, mobile work force of subcontracted workers where costs could be shared by the industry. Health and safety 'passports'/'swipe-cards' were popular suggestions as part of the management of this. Obviously, open debate and research are necessary prerequisites to these future possibilities.
The limitations of drawing conclusions from qualitative interview data are well-documented. However, it is believed that this exploratory study has provided some insight into the issues regarding occupational health management in the engineering construction industry reflecting the views of experienced individuals within the industry. It has also highlighted the need for a larger, more systematic and analytical study in this area, for example auditing health record keeping, health surveillance practices, expenditure on the site occupational health service, attendance at health and safety meetings, training in health hazards and conducting fitness for work assessments. CONCLUSIONS 1. Data and records regarding health-related absence were limited and inconsistent on the case study sites, particularly for subcontracted workers. It is suspected that die situation across the broader construction industry is likely to be worse.
2. These case studies illustrate that little exists in terms of pre-employment questionnaires, medicals, health assessments and health surveillance, once again particularly for subcontracted workers.
3. The main difficulties envisaged in occupational health management were the potential large costs involved; the sizeable, temporary and mobile work force; demonstrating cost-benefits to top management; and the lack of interest among workers, perhaps due to possible loss of livelihood.
4. The case studies confirmed limited health expertise among managers coupled with a lack of understanding of the potential role of health professionals in construction organizations, e.g., health surveillance, health and safety committees, specific health training, fitness for work and sickness absence management.
5. A lack of health professionals (with formal occupational health qualifications) on site was confirmed.
6. Research in the area of health management of construction workers is urgently needed to provide guidance to the industry.
lack of normal sensitivity. 6, 7 It has been shown that compression of the spinal nerve roots may induce neurophysiologic dysfunction, degeneration, and reduced blood flow in nerve roots in both animal models and humans. 6, 7 Recently, cytokines such as interleukins 1, 6 (IL-1, IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) have been strongly linked to radicular pain. 2, 7, 8 It has also been reported that IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-a are activated in dorsal root ganglia and Schwann cells in the spinal nerve roots following lumbar spinal stenosis, and that their expression is closely related to pain, motor nerve dysfunction and degeneration. 3, 7 In animal models, the TNF-a inhibitors, infliximab (intravenous injection) and etanercept (subcutaneous injection), have prevented a nucleus pulposus-induced reduction of nerve conduction velocity and also seemed to limit nerve fiber injury, intracapillary thrombus formation, and intraneural edema. 9 In the clinic, inhibition of TNF-a has become a common modality for treating rheumatoid disease. It has been reported that a single intravenous infusion of infliximab was effective in treating sciatic pain caused by lumbar disc herniation. 10 On the other hand, intravenous infusion of infliximab was compared to a placebo by a Finnish group that conducted the first randomized controlled trial of this inhibitor. The results were disappointing. 11, 12 Cohen et al. have reported a preclinical safety study of transforaminal epidural etanercept for the treatment of sciatica caused by disc herniation in 24 patients. They found effectiveness was dependent on the dose of etanercept (4 groups). 13 In the clinical arm of the study, significant improvements in leg and back pain were collectively noted for the etanercept-treated patients one The purpose of the current study was to examine the effect on radicular pain of epidural administration of the TNF-a inhibitor, etanercept, onto spinal nerves in patients with lumbar spinal stenosis. We compared application of the TNF-a inhibitor, etanercept, with application of dexamethasone for the treatment of pain.
The ethics committee of our institution approved the protocol for the human procedures used in this study and informed written consent was obtained from each subject.
Patients had low back and leg pain, continuing for at least 1 month. Patients who had previously undergone spinal surgery were excluded from the study. We also excluded patients with spinal tumor, infection, or trauma. Patients were diagnosed with lumbar spinal stenosis on X-ray and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and by physical examination. Diagnosis by X-ray was spondylosis and spondylolisthesis (more than 3 mm of anterior slip in a normal position). The degree of spinal stenosis varied from slight to severe. MRI showed central stenosis, stenosis of the lateral recess, and foraminal stenosis. We measured degree of stenosis in case of stenosis of the lateral recess and central stenosis and classified it as: >0% to ≤30%, slight stenosis; >30% to ≤70%, moderate stenosis; >70% to ≤100%, severe stenosis. Most patients diagnosed as having stenosis of the lateral recess fell into the category of slight stenosis in the current study. Details are shown in Table 1 infiltration was performed to confirm the finding. Patients were allowed nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to control low back pain and leg pain.
The patients were divided randomly into 2 groups. The patients were randomized according to the minimization method for injection using etanercept or injection using dexamethasone. 14 We employed sex and age as stratification factors. 
We evaluated the change in low back and leg pain before and after epidural administration. To evaluate pain, the visual analogue scale (VAS) score (0, no pain; 10, worst pain) was recorded before and 30 minutes, 3 days, 1 week, 2 weeks, and 4 weeks after epidural administration.
Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) scores were recorded before and 4 weeks after epidural administration.
Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
At 4 weeks after injection, patients were asked to choose one of the following responses regarding their satisfaction with the treatment: (1) treatment met my expectations; (2) I did not improve as much as I had hoped, but I would undergo the same treatment for the same outcome;
(3) treatment helped, but I would not undergo the same treatment for the same outcome; or (4) I am the same as or worse than I was before the treatment.
Deep or superficial infection including respiratory infection in both groups was evaluated. Spinal nerve injury (motor palsy or sensory disturbance) or other complications in both groups were also evaluated.
Data were compared using a Kruskal-Wallis test to compare pain scales between the two groups, a one-way ANOVA with post hoc comparisons for age, symptom duration, and follow-up; and Fisher's test was used for dichotomous/categorical variables. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Demographic characteristics of patients in both the etanercept and dexamethasone groups are shown in Table 1 . There was no significant difference in VAS score (leg pain, low back pain, leg numbness) and ODI score between the 2 groups (P > 0.05). There was no significant difference in the number of the patients who used NSAIDs between the 2 groups (P > 0.05). Affected spinal nerves were mainly in L5 spinal nerves in both groups.
In both groups, treatment was significantly effective in attenuating leg pain, leg numbness, and low back pain 30 min after injection (P < 0.05) (Figures 1, 2, and 3 ). For leg pain in both groups, treatment was significantly effective in attenuating the pain during the 4 weeks of testing (P < 0.05) (Figure 1 ). VAS scores of leg pain in the etanercept group were significantly lower than those in the dexamethasone group at 3 days, and 1, 2, and 4 weeks (P < 0.05) (Figure 1 ).
For leg numbness, treatment was significantly effective in attenuating the pain during the 4 weeks in both groups (P < 0.05) ( Figure 2 ). VAS scores of leg numbness in the etanercept group were significantly lower than those in the dexamethasone group at 3 days, and 1, and 2 weeks (P < 0.05) (Figure 2 ).
Both epidural administrations were effective for low back pain (VAS) in both group during the 4 weeks (P<0.05) (Figure 3 ). VAS scores of low back pain in the etanercept group were significantly lower than those in the dexamethasone group at 3 days, and 1, and 2 weeks (P < 0.05) (Figure 3 ).
There was no significant difference in ODI scores before epidural administration between the groups (P > 0.05). The average ODI score decreased at 4 weeks, and there was significant improvement in both groups compared with before epidural administration (P < 0.05) ( Table 1 and 3). However, there was no significant difference in ODI score between the etanercept and dexamethasone groups at 4 weeks (P > 0.05) ( Table 3 ).
Details of subjective outcomes 4 weeks after injection are presented in Table 4 . Subjective outcomes for most patients in both groups were good or fair; however, 6 patients in the etanercept group and 11 patients in the dexamethasone group reported an unexpected or poor outcome. Table 5 shows complications, from injection through 4 weeks of follow-up. There was no respiratory infection, deep, or superficial infection in either group. There was no spinal nerve injury or other complications in either group.

In the current study, results indicate that single epidural administration of a TNF-a inhibitor onto the spinal nerve produced significantly more pain relief than application of dexamethasone, and produced no adverse event. TNF-a may mediate the radicular pain caused by spinal stenosis in humans.
It has also been reported that TNF-a is activated in dorsal root ganglia and Schwann cells in the spinal nerve roots following lumbar spinal stenosis, and is closely related to pain. 3, 7 In human studies, the concentration of TNF-a has been found to be high in synovium in facet joints in lumbar spinal stenosis patients compared with lumbar disc herniation patients, thus suggesting that TNF-a in degenerated facet joints may be related to the cause of pain in degenerative lumbar disorders. 15 Recently, two types of TNF-a inhibitors, infliximab and etanercept, have been used to treat radicular leg pain in animal and human studies. Intraperitoneal injection of infliximab prevents nucleus pulposus-induced histologic changes in the rat DRG. 16 Treatment with infliximab significantly reduced pain-related behavior in rats. 4 Etanercept prevented nerve degeneration. 9 It has recently been reported that intravenous injection of infliximab is clinically effective in treating sciatic pain caused by lumbar disc herniation. 10 On the other hand, the effect of intravenous injection of infliximab was examined in a randomized controlled trial, and found not to be effective. 11, 12 These studies in animal models and in humans are controversial, and the effect of direct application of TNF-a inhibitor onto damaged nerves including those found in spinal stenosis has not been fully explored.
Several authors have reported that the effects of direct application of a TNF-a inhibitor onto spinal nerves affected disc herniation in animals and humans. Norimoto et al. have reported that nucleus pulposus application onto crushed sciatic nerves produced mechanical allodynia;
however, epidural administration of a TNF-a inhibitor (etanercept) onto the sciatic nerve did not suppress pain-related behavior. 17 Cohen et al. have reported a study in which 24 patients with subacute lumbosacral radiculopathy caused by disc herniation were randomly assigned to receive two transforaminal epidural injections of 2, 4, or 6 mg of etanercept, and significant improvements in leg and back pain were noted for the etanercept-treated patients, but not for the saline-treated control group, at one month after treatment. No adverse event was reported. 13 In the current study, we showed that epidural administration of a TNF-a inhibitor onto spinal nerves relieved pain caused by spinal stenosis. We concluded that TNF-a may play a crucial role in pain caused by both lumbar disc herniation and spinal stenosis. VAS scores of low back pain in the etanercept group were significantly lower than those in the dexamethasone group during a 2-week follow-up. However, there was no significant difference in ODI scores between the etanercept and dexamethasone groups at 4 weeks. In this regard, single application of 10 mg of etanercept had a relatively short term effect for low back pain.
In the current study, we compared lidocaine+etanercept with lidocaine+dexamethasone. The efficacy of steroids for nerve root injection has been reported. Fifty-five patients who were deemed to be surgical candidates were treated and randomized to receive either a selective nerve root injection of betamethasone 6 mg with bupivacaine or a selective nerve root injection of bupivacaine alone. This study showed that 67% of patients in the group receiving both local anesthetic and steroid avoided the need for surgical intervention, compared with 28% in the group receiving local anesthetic alone. 18 A systematic review of therapeutic lumbar transforaminal epidural steroid therapy has shown that the indicated evidence for transforaminal lumbar epidural steroid injections is both short-and long-term pain relief compared with local anesthetic alone. 19 In the current study, we showed that application of etanercept produced significantly more pain relief than application of dexamethasone alone. We did not examine a lidocaine only group; however, etanercept is probably more effective for pain than application of lidocaine alone by analogy with the previous studies.
It is not clear whether systemic or direct administration of the inhibitor is the most effective route. In previous reports, intravenous injection of infliximab was effective or ineffective in treating sciatic pain caused by lumbar disc herniation 10, 11, 12 TNF-a is mainly expressed around or in the disc tissue, where blood supply is generally considered to be insufficient. Therefore we believe that the supply of TNF-a inhibitors is insufficient in case of systemic administration. It is also known that TNF-a inhibitors can have adverse effects when administered in high doses systemically. 18 It is not known if these effects occur after direct administration to nerve; 2) I did not improve as much as I had hoped, but I would undergo the same treatment for the same outcome 12 12 3) Treatment helped, but I would not undergo the same treatment for the same outcome 
Club drugs have been a growing concern in the United States since the 1980s. Although a number of psychoactive agents have been referred to as "club drugs," the most common substances encompassed by the term are: ecstasy (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine or MDMA), GHB (gamma-hydroxybutyrate), ketamine, LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), methamphetamines, PCP (phencyclidine), and Rohypnol R (flunitrazepam). Currently available data suggest that ecstasy use in the United States is most common (Arria et al., 2002; . Recently, national surveillance data have suggested that ecstasy use is declining among adolescents . However, these observations arise from studies conducted among predominantly white populations. With the exception of the national surveillance studies (e.g., Monitoring the Future Study, National Household Survey on Drug Abuse), most domestic studies have been conducted among rave or circuit party attendees (Arria et al., 2002; Colfax et al., 2001; Mansergh et al., 2001; Mattison et al., 2001) , and men who have sex with men 1400 Ompad et al. Mansergh et al., 2001; Mattison et al., 2001; Klitzman, Pope, and Hudson, 2000) , most of whom are white.
There is emerging evidence that the club drug economy may be changing. Recent reports have documented the movement of club drugs from clubs and raves to the streets. The National Institute on Drug Abuse's Community Epidemiology Working Group has reported that ecstasy was moving from the clubs to the street in several cities, including Baltimore and New York (Community Epidemiology Work Group, 2001) . In light of these changes in drug use availability and the paucity of data available among minorities, we investigated the use of ecstasy among minority substance users in New York City (N.Y.C.). To investigate whether or not to conduct major efforts to estimate ecstasy use in minority communities, we chose to start with a survey of use within an ongoing project that involves recruitment of injectors as well as noninjectors of heroin or cocaine within two minority communities. This sampling was not considered representative of the respective communities but was meant to provide an indication of the presence of ecstasy that may then warrant closer attention.

Between October 2002 and September 2003, we interviewed substance users participating in three ongoing observational studies in N.Y.C. Eligibility for the parent studies included age, ≥15 years old and recent (past 2 months) use of heroin, crack, or cocaine more than monthly. Recruitment involved targeted sampling with street outreach techniques, and data collection was conducted at two stationary storefronts in Central Harlem (Manhattan) and the South Bronx and a recreational vehicle that parked in Brooklyn, the Lower East Side of Manhattan, and Queens, all in N.Y.C. Recruitment methods used in these studies have been described in more detail elsewhere (Diaz et al., 2001a; Diaz et al., 2001b) . This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the New York Academy of Medicine.
After providing informed consent, participants completed an interviewer-administered questionnaire that elicited information on demographic characteristics and drug use (i.e., type, frequency, duration). A supplemental questionnaire was added to ongoing studies to elicit detailed information on club drug use. Participants were reimbursed $20 for participation in the study.
Bivariate analyses were conducted to assess the relation between demographic and club drug use variables by race using chi-square statistics for categorical variables and ANOVA for continuous variables. Covariates that were significantly associated with use of ecstasy in bivariate analyses (p < 0.2) were entered into a multivariate logistic model. Variables were retained in the final model if they were significant at the p = 0.10 level. Potential interactions were examined, including race and country of birth and race and injection drug use. All analyses were conducted using Intercooled STATA 7 (Stata Corp., College Station, Texas).
Between October 2002 and September 2003, we recruited 715 substance users. Among these, 546 (76.4%) were male and 169 (23.6%) were female. Hispanics were the 85 (11.9) 61 (13.7) 15 (7.7) 9 (12.2) 0.098 ecstasy use predominant racial group (62.4%), followed by blacks (27.3%) and whites (10.3%). The median age at enrollment was 32 (range 17-64). Half (49.0%) were currently homeless. One-third (34.5%) had been born outside the United States, and 11.9% had lived in New York City for less than a year. The proportion of the substance users that injected drugs was 58.3%. Overall, 25.6% reported using ecstasy in their lifetime and 11.9% had used it in the last 6 months.
We assessed racial differences in demographic characteristics and ecstasy use (Table 1) . Hispanics were significantly more likely than blacks and whites to be male (81.4% vs. 71.8% and 58.1%, respectively) and to have lived in New York City for less than a year (16.4% vs. 2.6% and 9.5%, respectively) and less likely to have been born in the U.S. (52.1% vs. 90.7% and 83.6%, p < 0.001). Blacks tended to be older; whites were more likely to have a high school diploma (or equivalent) and less likely to have dropped out of school. In terms of substance use, whites were more likely than Hispanics and blacks to have a lifetime history of both ecstasy use (44.6% vs. 26.7% and 15.9%, respectively) and crack use (93.2% vs. 84.3% and 89.2%, respectively) as well as to have a history of injection drug use (85.1% vs. 64.7% and 33.3%, respectively). Compared to blacks, whites and Hispanics were more likely to have used ecstasy in the last 6 months, although this association was not significant (p = 0.098). Among the 85 people who had used ecstasy in the last 6 months, 47 (55.3%) had used once a month or less, 13 (15.3%) had used 2 to 3 days a month, 11 (12.9%) had used about once per week or 2 to 3 days per week, two (2.4%) had used 4 to 6 days per week, and one (1.2%) had used everyday. We next constructed a multivariate logistic regression model to examine correlates of lifetime ecstasy use (Table 2) . Ecstasy users were more likely to be 25 years old or younger [Adjusted Odds Ratio (AOR) = 4.26, 95% Confidence Interval (CI): 2.87, 6.33], born in the U.S. (AOR = 1.65, 95% CI: 1.08, 2.54), and currently homeless (AOR = 1.56, 95% CI: 1.08, 2.27). We observed a significant interaction between injection drug use and race where, compared to black noninjectors, Hispanic noninjectors and white injectors were significantly more likely to have a history of lifetime ecstasy use (AOR = 2.07, 95% CI: 1.16, 3.67 and AOR = 3.08, 95% CI: 1.53, 6.18, respectively), while black injectors were significantly less likely (AOR = 0.24, 95% CI: 0.07, 0.82). The Pearson χ 2 goodness-of-fit test for the estimated model indicated that we could not reject the model (p = 0.1457).
Finally, we constructed a multivariate logistic regression model to examine correlates of recent ecstasy use (Table 3) . Compared to blacks, Hispanics were significantly more likely to have used ecstasy in the last 6 months (AOR = 2.13, 95% CI: 1.11, 4.09). Ecstasy users were more likely to be under 25 years old (AOR = 4.66, 95% CI: 2.87, 7.55), currently homeless (AOR = 1.60, 95% CI: 0.98, 2.61), but less likely to be an injection drug user (AOR = 0.39, 95% CI: 0.34, 0.66). We did not observe any significant interactions. The Pearson χ 2 goodness-of-fit test for the estimated model indicated good model fit (p = 0.7620).
To date, evidence of club drug use among minority populations, and ecstasy use in particular, is sparse. What little evidence there is suggests that, in broader population contexts, Asians were more likely and blacks were less likely than whites to have used ecstasy in the past year (Boyd, McCaben, and d'Arcy, 2003) . Data from the Monitoring the Future (MTF) Study found that ecstasy users in the general population are overwhelmingly white, where between 89 and 91% of 12-month ecstasy users were white . While at least 30% of these samples are non-white, they represent students attending high school or college (Boyd, McCaben, and d'Arcy, 2003) . In our study, whites reported a higher prevalence of lifetime ecstasy use (44.6%). However, lifetime history of ecstasy use was common among street-recruited Hispanic and black users of heroin, cocaine, and crack in New York City (26.7% and 15.9%, respectively). Caution is needed in interpreting data from this study, as our sample included persons selected for using other illicit drugs. This data then should not be construed as generalizing to minority communities in general. What the data suggest instead is that street-based ecstasy use is present at least in some measure within a subset of illicit drug users from predominantly minority communities. Much of the current knowledge of the epidemiology of ecstasy use relies on surveillance studies like the MTF Study, which samples public and private school students in the United States . In our sample, only 46.1% had finished high school (or equivalent), and 77.0% had dropped out of school at least once. Whether minority ecstasy users are more likely to drop out of school is unclear, and needs further examination. It is likely that persons like the participants in our studies are overlooked by surveillance systems such as the MTF, suggesting that current U.S. estimates of prevalence of club drug use, particularly among minorities, are low.
Congruent with previous studies Strote, Lee, and Wechsler, 2002) , we observed that ecstasy users were young. We observed a significant interaction between injection drug use and race where Hispanic noninjectors and white injectors were significantly more likely, and black injectors were significantly less likely, to have a history of lifetime ecstasy use. We also found that being U.S.-born was an independent correlate of lifetime ecstasy use, but did not observe an interaction between race and country of birth. Previous studies have reported that individuals born in the U.S., and Hispanics in particular (Brindis et al., 1995) , have higher rates of drug use as compared non-U.S. born immigrants (Johnson, VanGeest, and Cho, 2002) . Further investigation of this finding will be necessary to understand the social environment and context of ecstasy use among U.S. minorities.
We also found that current homelessness was associated with lifetime ecstasy use. This relationship has not been reported previously. A possible explanation for this relationship could be that homeless people are more mobile through the city or the country, and therefore have access to different drug markets. Such data are not available in this dataset, but would be an area for additional research. Qualitative data would also further our understanding of this finding.
While the sample studied here is not representative of all minorities or all minority drug users, it does provide evidence for ecstasy use among young black and Hispanic heroin, crack, and cocaine users that is higher than the previously reported prevalences of ecstasy use among minorities. Anecdotal reports suggest that MDMA is being sold on the streets of Harlem and the South Bronx, areas that are predominantly Hispanic and black. The changing venues of club drug use and the evolving club drug trade are beginning to be documented (Community Epidemiology Work Group, 2001 ). Our findings provide further evidence for availability of club drugs outside their tradition venues.
The burden of "substance abuse" is already high among minority communities in the United States (Galea et al., 2003; Buka, 2002; Harlow, 1990) , and the precarious health status of these communities could be further compromised by another "epidemic" of drug use. Our findings highlight the need for further investigation of ecstasy use in minority populations, to determine the extent of use and to understand the posited risk factors and their dimensions, the necessary conditions for them to operate or not, as well as correlates of use among minorities.
This study was partly funded by grants DA13146 and DA12801 from the National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Des données recueillies semblent indiquer que l'usage de l'Ecstasy dans lesÉtats-Unis est prédominante parmi les adolescents et les jeunes adultés. Pourétudier l'usage de l'Ecstasyà New York City nous avons ajouté des questions aux oeuvres en cours pour recruter des comsommateurs de l'héroïne et de la cocaïne. Parmi les 715 participants, 58,3% etaient consommateurs d'injections de drogues (IDUs). L'âge médianeétait de de 32 ans (de 17à 64), 76,4%étaient mâles, 49.0%étaient sans abri, 62.4%étaient Hispaniques et 27.3%étaient Noirs. 34.5% n'étaient pas nés dans lesÉtats Unis.
En général, 23.4% ont consommé de l'Ecstasy une fois ou l'autre et 11.9% l'ont consommée pendant les derniers six mois. Dans l'analyse de régression logistique multivariée, la corrélation de l'usage de l'Ecstasy de toute une vie y compris les jeunes,étant né dans lesÉtats Unis, et les sans abri courants. Nous avons observé une interaction considérable entre la consommation de la drogue injectée et la race où, comparés aux non-IDUs Noirs, non-IDUs Hispaniques et IDUs Blancs avaient considérablement une histoire de consommation de drogue pendant toute la vie plus probable tandis que les IDUs Noirs enétaient considérablement moins problables. Ces conclusions sont limités aux personnes qui consomment d'autres drogues mais elles indiquent qu'une investigation plus ample de la consommation de l'Ecstasy dans la population minoritaire est justifiée.
Los datos observados nos sugieren que el uso de la drogaÉxtasis en los EE. UU. ocurre predominantemente entre los adolescentes blancos y los adultos jóvenes. Para investigar el uso de Extasis entre los usuarios de drogas en la ciudad de Nueva York, añadimos preguntas a las formuladas en nuestros esfuerzos actuales para reclutar usuarios de heroína y de cocaína para un estudio. De los 715 participantes reclutados, 58.3% eran usuarios de drogas por inyección. La mediana de edad era de 32 años, en un grupo que abarcaba desde los 17 a los 64 años; 76.4% eran varones; 49% eran desamparados; 62.4% eran hispanos, y 27.3% eran negros. 34.5% nacieron fuera de los EE. UU. En conjunto, 23.4% de ellos habían consumido Extasis en algún momento de sus vidas, y 11.9% la habían usado en losúltimos 6 meses.
En regresión logística multivariada, los correlatos de uso del Extasis incluyeron una menor edad del usuario, el haber nacido en los EE.UU., y el encontrarse actualmente sin hogar. Observamos una interacción significativa entre el uso de drogas inyectadas y la raza: comparados con los negros no usuarios de drogas inyectadas, los hispanos no usuarios de drogas inyectadas y los blancos usuarios se mostraban significativamente más tendientes al consumo deÉxtasis a lo largo de su vida, en tanto que los negros usuarios de drogas inyectadas aparecían como significativamente menos tendientes a ello.
Estas conclusiones se limitan a personas que consumen otras drogas, pero sugieren que está justificado el realizar investigaciones adicionales sobre el uso de Extasis entre grupos demográficos minoritarios. He has extensive experience in the design, conduct, and analysis of infectious disease and substance abuse epidemiological studies. He is the Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Urban Health and has been appointed to the National Advisory Council on Drug Abuse within the Department of Health and Human Services. Dr. Vlahov has received funding from the NIH and the CDC to conduct epidemiologic intervention studies of HIV prevention in Harlem and the South Bronx involving young, adult recent consent injection drug users and noninjection drug users.

The first association problem of pathogenic organisms is directed to fungi, nematodes, bacteria and viruses. These organisms certainly lead to economically significant damages of plants, and the fact that parasitic flowering plants are also economically significant pathogens can be surprising. Parasitic plants are angiosperms (flowering plants) that are directly linked to other plants by haustoria. Haustoria are root modifications that form morphological and physiological bonds between the parasite and the host. Parasitic plants (originating from Greek word para -beside and zitos -guard oneself) are organisms that cause parasitic plant diseases. These are predominantly heterotrophic organisms, because they feed by ready to eat food that they take from either living cells or dead organic matter. Only a limited number of autotrophic organisms adapted to parasitic way of life. Between parasites and saprophytes (sapro -rot, phyton -plant), there is a great number of transitional forms, and among them there are no clear boundaries. Some authors use this name to mark any agent of plant diseases, either of parasitic or non-parasitic nature. Therefore, it would be a broader concept in relation to parasite which is of biotic nature. However, phytopathologists often use the term pathogen, mainly for parasitic organisms. If the symptoms of disease are created on the host, then it is pathogen, as well as parasite. Until now, great number of parasitic organisms was identified on plants. For example, so far in North America there are about 8.000 parasitic fungi, 300 bacteria, 500 viruses, 75 species of organisms that look like mycoplasma and about 3.000 described parasitic flowering plants. Parasitic weed species, known as broomrape -Orobanche cumana Wallr. is one of limiting factors in sunflower production, as well as in other world countries. Genetic resistance in combination with herbicides is the best manner for control of this weed species (Eizenberg et al., 2006; Rubiales et al., 2009; Fernandez -Martinez et al., 2010) . Even beside possible control, there is significant increase of infected areas. This parasitic weed originates from Russia, and nowadays is widely spread in Eurasia, including Black Sea region (Antonova et al., 2009) . In Serbia, presence of broomrape has also been confirmed (Maširević and Medić-Pap, 2009 ), as well as on the territory of Romania (Pricop et al., 2011 ), Turkey (Demirci and Kaya, 2009 ), Spain (Fernandez-Martinez et al., 2009 ), Israel (Eizenberg et al., 2003 , and it has recently been also discovered in Africa (Amri et al., 2012) . Certainly that intensive exchange of sunflower seeds between countries in the world, as well as small broomrape seed enable fast spread of this weed species. High genetic resistance of commercial sunflower hybrids to this weed species in Argentina could be potential answer to high distribution of this weed species (Cantamutto et al., 2012) . Parasitic flowering plants, such as species of the genus Cuscuta L. (dod-der) and Orobanche L. (broomrape), quantitatively do not have significant number in relation to total weedy vegetation of Serbia that numbers 1,009 species (Kojić and Vrbničanin, 1998 ). Cuscuta genus includes over 100 species, distributed in moderate and warmer regions of the world. In vegetation Serbia, represented are only 10 species of this genus (Kojić and Vrbničanin, 2000) .
Unlike ordinary weeds, parasitic plants are heterogeneous plant organisms that are not able to synthetize sufficient nutrients need for their development, due to which they lodge to other, host plant out of which they extract nutrients through structures called haustoria that anatomically connect binding channels of two plants (Konstantinović, 1999) .
There are two basic types of parasitic plants that can be distinguished: parasites of stem and parasites of root. Stem parasites occurred in several families, and pathogens are some mistletoe and field dodder (Cassitha and Cuscuta). Stem parasites are more frequent and are found in different taxonomic groups. Some of economically important stem pathogens belong to the family of flowering plants, Orobanchaceae. Holoparasite and hemiparasite species differ according to the degree of dependence of parasites on the host plant. Hemiparasites can be obligatory and facultative parasites. Optional (facultative or semi-) parasitic weeds contain chlorophyll and can survive without host. Facultative parasites or necrotrophs held mostly on dead organic matter (saprophytic phase), and only a part of development cycle they spend on plants (parasitic phase). From the other hand, complete (obligatory or parasitic) weeds, demand host for survival. Obligatory parasites can develop only on alive tissues of the host plant. Hemiparazites contain chlorophyll during their growth, thus being photosyntetically active, and uptake water by binding with the host by haustoria. Holoparazites lack chlorophyll i.e. they are photosyntetically inactive and therefore they must rely on the host xylem and phloem content. All holoparasites are obligatory parasites. Although these definitions imply absolute and partial categorization, some parasitic plants are intermediators between hemi-and holoparasitic plants, e.g. Cuscuta (dodder).
Morphological characteristics. On some stem parasites such as Cassitha (mistletoe) and Cuscuta (dodder), vegetative part consists exclusively from stem and rudimentary leaves. Opposite to this, numerous photosynthetic hemiparasites of root will not be accepted as parasites because they are green with completely formed leaves. As the level of parasitic dependence grows (evolution from hemiparasites to holoparasites), great changes occurred in morphology of parasitic plants. The best example of evolutionary phase from hemi-to holoparasites can be seen between different representatives of the family of flowering plants (Orobanchaceae).
This family includes the greatest number of genus (90) and species (about 1800) of all families of parasitic flowering plants. In Serbia there are 26 different broomrape species, 56 varieties and 226 forms that make total of 308 taxa (Maširević and Medić-Pap, 2009 ). In the past hemiparasitic members of this family have been classified as a part of Scrophulariaceae family, while holoparasitic members have been included in Orobanchaceae family. The most recent molecular phylogenetic studies that have included both hemi-and holoparasites show that Orobanchaceae are monophyletic -i.e. they originate from a common ancestor, and that evolutionary line is offspring of non-parasitic Scrophulariaceae. In further text, two economically most important genus, Striga and Orobanche are described separately, with similarities and differences of their life cycles.
Orobanche L. The genus Orobanche contains about 150 species of holoparasites that attack the root of the host. These plants are known for their English names ''broomrape'', because it was thought to grow as tubers ("rapum") from broom (the common name for legumes Cytisus). This genus reaches its greatest diversity in Mediterranean climate and north Asia. The majority of economically significant pathogenic species are of ancient origin. Molecular proves suggest that Orobanche is not monophyletic, so that other generic terms can eventually be applied. The main families of host for parasitic Orobanche are legumes, nightshades (eggplant, tomato, tobacco, potato, but not paprika), then squires (carrot, parsley, celery), brassicas (cabbage, cauliflower) and composites (lettuce, sunflower). Control is difficult due to seed dormancy in the soil (more than five decades), tiny seeds (smaller than width of the human hair), fertility (thousands of seeds per plant), as well as due to underground phases (seed germination) under soil and lives as parasite host before it emerges and becomes evident. Populations that naturally occur in red clover (Trifolium pratense) and carrot (Daucus carota subsp. Gummifer), show different host specificities, indicating possibilities of fast adaptation. There are numerous studies on hosts that attack Orobanche species. It has been shown that O. ramosa L. can parasitize plants in 11 different dicotyledonous families, in fact, on several different hosts than any other flowering plants. Related species of O. aegiptiaca cause especially heavy damages of melon in Central Asia, where flowering plants not only reduce yield, but also encourage production of toxins within melons that become commercially unusable. For example, there are no reports of parasitism in soybean by any flowering plant, although O. crenata Forsk. is soybean parasite in a pot. However, pot assays are valuable, for potential hosts can be identified on the bases of specificity of domestic parasite strains that can be identified. In general, Orobanche is the parasite of colder climates, and germination temperature is between 10 to 20 °C, alternately with temperatures of 5 °C. This can explain why O. ramosa represents a problem in the river Nile valley in Sudan only in winter, and the fact why O. cernua Loefl. attacks tobacco in India, and it does not represent a problem in sunflower (Helianthus annuus) grown in the same region during summer. Orobanche noticeably weaken roots of its host. The longest dormancy of Orobanche seed in the soil was documented in Bulgaria in 1956 due to severe Orobanche infection, in tobacco fields of Tobacco Research Institute near Plovdiv, was planted a vineyard. In 1991 vineyards were removed and tobacco was sown again. Great number of O. ramosa occurred probably out of seed that were dispersed during previous tobacco cropping in 1956. O. ramosa imported in California makes a problem on tomato. Despite efforts to eradicate it, the parasite keeps surviving. It is highly probable that parasite seed was imported by the crop, by either infected plant or contaminated tomato seed. More recent of tomato in Chile should be used as a warning that O. ramosa infection can be expected wherever there is a convenient host.
Orobanche cernua is widely distributed in East Europe and Middle East, with heavy invasions in South India and sporadical occurrences in North Africa, China and East Europe. Its primary hosts are crops from Solanaceae family and sunflower. Sunflower is the most important oil plant in some parts of East Europe, and O. cernua is a major constraint for production, especially in Bulgaria in which sunflower oil is a national brend. Infected plants are stunted and have smaller heads and lower oil quality. Between 1947 and 1950, Orobanche created a problem that in Bulgaria became so serious that it threatened further sunflower existence. Tobacco can be seriously damaged by O. cernua; however, tobacco was not attacked in Bulgaria, even in regions near heavily infected sunflower fields. In India in which tobacco is heavily damaged, situation is inverted and sunflower was not attacked. It has been proved that O. cernua devel-ops on hosts from family Solanaceae and that it will not attack sunflower. Russian breeders studied O. cernua development for many years. Their data should be studied and proved by new genetic methods (PCR). Given the size of the area under sunflower, more awareness on this pathogen is needed. Yet another of the species from Orobanche genus is O. crenata. Main hosts of this species are ordinary beans, lentils, forage legumes, carrot, parsley, celery and etc.
The other two genus of Orobanchaceae family, Aeginetia and Christisonia, can be considered smaller problem on monocotyledonous plants. In agro-ecological region of Serbia, broomrape on sunflower in greater or lesser extent occurs almost annually and can cause significant damages. One of the most efficient and the most economical ways of control of these parasitic flowering plants is certainly sowing of resistant hybrids. For studies on hybrid resistance to broomrape it is very important to have broomrape seed of good rate of emergence. Trifender is biological product based Trichoderma asperellum. Broomrape rate of emergence is the lowest on medium with trifender; thus, the effect of this biological product for seed germination should be studied in more detail (Maširević et al., 2011) .
Orobanche cumana Wallr., as well as other parasitic plants from the family Orobanchaceae, demand presence of chemical compounds from the environment as stimulus for germination. In the study of Plakhine et al. (2009) showed that seed germination of O. cumana. is improved due to influence of synthetic nijmegen-1 strigolactone applied directly to dry seed. Studies directed toward development of PCR methods for detection of seed abundance of two parasitic plants Phelipanche ramosa and Orobanche cumana, as well as related species are used during harvest of rapeseed and sunflower. The method is based upon design of the starting probing. The method is based on the design of initial probing that is set for each parasitic plant with determination of transcribed space sequences for quantitative PCR determination. Together with the proposed DNA protocol, this diagnostic method allows a faster, high-throughput and accurate assessment of contaminated rapeseed, without complex purification steps and identification under a binocular microscope. TaqMan assay is highly specific, since it is not possible to detect plant impurities that are present in a given crops seed. The results of this test can be presented via the number of parasite seeds per kilogram of crops seed, which can contribute to improved sales of crops seed (Rodriguez et al., 2010) . It is known that a new specific bioassays lead to the discovery of new classes of biologically active compounds (Yoneyama, 2010) .
Cuscuta species, commonly known as dodder is among the best known parasitic plants, and is one of the most invasive weeds in the world. Species of Cuscuta, known as field dodder is among the best known parasitic plants, and it is one of the most invasive weeds in the world (Lowe et al., 2001) . Field dodders have wide spectrum of hosts, although they favour less monocotyledonous species. Genus Cuscuta contains three sub-genuses. Members of subgenus monogina are robust vines that attack and destroy fruit trees, while the species in subgenus Cuscuta represents a problem for hosts of the herbaceous plants, as well as subgenus Grammica. Infected plants weaken; vegetative luxuriance is reduced, as well as their fertility (Koskela et al., 2001; Fathoulla and Duhoky, 2008) . In moderate climate, field dodder is maybe the most important parasitic weed of legumes. C. campestris in alfalfa (Medicago sativa) is of special importance. Alfalfa and field dodder seed are alike by size, and by alfalfa sowing the parasites spreads with the host. The most efficient control measure is sowing of pure seed. Due to bumpy surface of field dodder seed, it retains, and cylindrical seed of alfalfa passes. Genus Cuscuta belongs to the family Convolvulaceae, although some authors think that it belongs to the other family (Cuscutaceae). Many species that are hardly recognizable and are able to parasite numerous shrubby and woody species belong to this genus. Although the results of the mitochondrial genome analysis confirmed a link between the family Convolvulaceae (McNeal & DePamphilis, 2000) , some studies also show that Cuscuta phylogenetically belongs to the family Convolvulaceae (Stefanovic et al., 2002; . Stefanovic & Olmstead, 2004) .
The most widespread species in our country is Cuscuta campestris, that is considered holoparasitic for it does not have pigments for photosynthesis. Performed assays showed that it contains chlorophyll (a or b), during its whole vital cycle, although in much smaller quantities than other green plants. Presence of this pigment varies depending on plant development stage and reaches maximum during flowering. In it are present chloroplasts that function during whole plant life cycles that are able to perform photosynthesis by chlorophyll, although to a lesser extent, which forces it into heterophyl nutrition. Cuscuta campestris is extremely difficult to control, due to its well coated seeds, as well as its natural joining in host-parasite association. Making part of ''seed bank'', Cuscuta seed in the soil maintains rate of emergence for long time, and it can survive at least 10 years in the field and up to 50 years in dry warehouses, depending upon the species (Dawson et al., 1984) . Chickpeas are very susceptible to C. campestris. However, there are several efficient selective products that are used in control of this parasite in chickpeas crops. After studies of several genotypes of Israeli varieties that are resistant to C. campestris, genotypes ICCV 95333 and Hazera 4 showed high resistance in more than 80% of the studied chickpeas (Goldwasser et al., 2012) .
Seeds of C. campestris are different in size and usually germinate in the following year, creating radicle rich in nutrients and a stem. Radicle first penetrates slowly into the soil, but later it degenerates and decays so that the plant loses all connection with land. The stem is able to grow up to a month until it meets the host plant on which it fastens. It is in the form of a thread, with varying looks, yellow-whitish in colour, with no leaves and it is able to hold onto the host plant due to hooks, or papillae. The flowers are white, small and produce many seeds. The most frequent host plants of Cuscuta campestris are medicinal plants from family Fabaceae, as well as sugar beet crop. Control of this parasite is performed primarily by preventive measures, in order to inhibit seed germination. If the parasitic plant has already spread, herbicide application that acts on cell division is efficient. Field dodder is certainly great problem in cultivation of cranberry and other fruit trees shrubs (Sandler, 2010) . With the aim of field dodder control, treatment is made in alfalfa 1-3 trifoliate leaf stage, or after first cutting with some of the following herbicides: imazethapyr, clethodim, propyzamid, diquat and fluazifop-p-butyl (Konstantinović et al., 2004) . Use of Cuscuta species in control of invasive weed species is a new approach that is being developed in China in last years (Yu et al., 2011; Shen et al., 2011) .
Even though 270 genera and 4400 species of flowering parasites are parasites, only about 25 genera have negative impact to cultivated plants and thus are considered pathogenic. Among them, two genera are the most harmful -Orobanche (broomrape) and Cuscuta (field dodder). Parasitic flowering plants are particularly harmful on legumes and crops belonging to family Solanaceae, primarily genus Orobanche. It produces thousands of tiny seeds that survive in the soil ''seed bank'' that makes control very difficult. However, as an integral part of every ecosystem that is compatible with its hosts, control is the only way for control of this parasite. Knowledge of the complex biology of parasitic flowering plants requires simultaneous studies of the host and parasitic flowering plant.
Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment 22(4) assessment of these women remains as problematic as the assessment of male sexual offenders was 20 years ago. Reliable estimates of the recidivism base rates of female sexual offenders would be a valuable aid to applied decision makers. Providing these estimates is the primary goal of this study.
The prevalence rate of female sexual offending is difficult to ascertain. Some authors believe that sexual offending by females is relatively common but that its extent is unknown because of the lack of reporting or because these women tend to be diverted from the criminal justice system (Vandiver & Walker, 2002) . Others suggest that sexual offending by women is likely to be underidentified because of societal and cultural stereotypes of female sexual behavior, including professional biases (Denov, 2003 (Denov, , 2004 Giguere & Bumby, 2007) .
In efforts to provide more systematic information about the prevalence of female sexual offenders, in comparison with male sexual offenders, Cortoni and Hanson (2005; Cortoni, Hanson, & Coache, 2009 ) estimated the proportion of sexual offenders who are women from two general sources of information. The first source of information was official police or court reports that detailed the gender of the offender. The second source of information was victimization surveys. For both sources, information was available for Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Results from the updated 2009 review were consistent with the earlier 2005 findings. Based on official records, the proportion of all sexual offenders who were female ranged from 0.6% in New Zealand to 8.7% for nonrape sexual offenders in the United States. When these numbers were averaged across all countries in the study, women constituted 4.6% of all sexual offenders. Based on victimization studies, the proportion of sexual offenders who were female ranged from 3.1% for New Zealand to 7.0% for Australia, an average of 4.8%.
In summary, available data indicate that women constitute approximately 5% of all sexual offenders. To place this number in a more concrete societal context, it is useful to estimate their proportion in real terms. To establish an overall international figure of the prevalence of child sexual abuse, Pereda, Guilera, Forns, and Gómez-Benito (2009) conducted a meta-analysis of its prevalence in 22 countries. Their results showed that nearly 8% of men and 20% of women had been sexually victimized prior to age 18. If 4% to 5% of all these victims were sexually abused by women, this would mean that 1.4% of all child victims were sexually abused by women. These findings indicate that sexual offending by women is significant enough to warrant systematic attention.
It is important to note, however, that despite the increased recent attention paid to sexual offending by women, we cannot say that sexual offending by women is actually a growing phenomenon. For example, in Canada, between 1994 and 2003 , the yearly rate of women accused of sexual assault has consistently been between 1% and 2% of all accused of sexual offences (Statistics Canada, 2007) . Instead, sexual offending by women appears to have been a long underrecognized issue, which is finally coming to the forefront in the field. The increased attention to female sexual offenders motivates the need for empirical evidence to inform the assessment, treatment, and management of these women.
The evaluation of risk of recidivism requires knowledge of static and dynamic risk factors that have been empirically linked to sexual offending. Much is known about risk factors among male sexual offenders (e.g., Hanson & Morton-Bourgon, 2005) , but very little is known about the factors linked to sexual offending among women (Hedderman, 2004; Kemshall, 2004) . To establish this knowledge, systematic information about the recidivism rates of the population is required.
Base rates are the proportion of the population that exhibits the phenomenon of interest. Understanding the base rates of recidivism is fundamental to the evaluation of risk of future offending (Hanson & Bussière, 1998; Quinsey, Lalumière, Rice, & Harris, 1995) . Recidivism rates vary according to factors such as jurisdictions, types of crimes being measured, length of time of follow-up, and how they were measured. Among male sexual offenders, research has shown that recidivism rates, with a follow-up period of 5 years, are 13.5% for new sexual offenses, 25.5% for violent (including sexual) offenses, and 36% for any type of recidivism (Hanson & MortonBourgon, 2004) .
After years of neglect, research into the recidivism rates of female sexual offenders has started to receive attention. Cortoni and Hanson's (2005) review found that the recidivism rates of female sexual offenders are generally low. The number of female offenders included in that review, however, was small (total of 380); a number of large sample studies have appeared since that review was complete. Also, Cortoni and Hanson (2005) did not provide a meta-analytic summary of recidivism rates, such that it was impossible to know whether the variability across studies was significant. Consequently, the current study provides an updated, meta-analytic review of the empirical literature concerning the recidivism rates of female sexual offenders.

Studies included conference presentations, government reports, official recidivism data drawn from websites or through direct communication with government agencies, and reports of unpublished studies obtained directly from the researchers. Recidivism studies were included if they identified the gender of the offenders and provided a follow-up period. As necessary, clarifications of the data were obtained by directly contacting the authors of the studies included in this review. For example, to ensure accurate coding of recidivism rates of the Sandler and Freeman (2009) (4) offenses or not. There were times, however, that such verifications were impossible. In these circumstances, only clearly identifiable recidivism rates were included in the study. As a result, not all types of recidivism were present in every study.
For this review, recidivism was defined as being arrested, charged, convicted, or incarcerated for a new offense. Sexual recidivism included a new charge, conviction, or reincarceration for a sexual offence. Violent recidivism was defined as a new violent charge, conviction, or incarceration for a new violent offense (including sexual offences). Any recidivism was defined as any new charge, conviction, or incarceration. Consequently, the categories of recidivism are cumulative rather than mutually exclusive.
The search yielded two published studies (Broadhurst & Loh, 2003; Sandler & Freeman, 2009) , two government reports (Hanson, Harris, Scott, & Helmus, 2007; Minnesota Department of Corrections, 2007) , four conference presentations (Peterson, Colebank, & Motta, 2001; Vandiver, 2007; Wijkman, Zoutewelle-Terovan, & Bijleveld, 2009; Williams & Nicholaichuk, 2001) , and two official sources of recidivism data (Holley & Ensley, 2003, Florida State, United States; Home Office, 1998 -2003 . Table 1 provides a summary of these studies; additional comments about these studies are provided below.
Broadhurst and Loh (2003) 11.5 (7) 32.8 (20) Nicholaichuk (2001) Note: "-", no information available. 
The basic effect size indicator was p, the proportion of recidivists (i.e., the number of recidivists divided by n, the sample size). Although raw proportions are easily interpreted, they have certain limitations as effect size indicators for meta-analysis. Using the standard formula, the variance of p is estimated as p(1 -p)/n (Fleiss, Levin, & Paik, 2003) . This variance is small in two quite different circumstances: (a) when the same size is very large and (b) when sample size is so small that there are no recidivists. This formula also assumes that the variance decreases as the proportions approach zero, which has the effect of giving the most weight to studies with the smallest recidivism rates.
Given the problems with analyzing raw proportions from different studies, variance stabilization transformations are recommended (Cohen, 1988; Eisenhart, 1947; Fleiss et al., 2003) . The most common variance stabilization transformation for proportions is the arcsine transformation, which we will denote by Ă, defined as Ă = 2 arcsin√P, with a variance of 1/n. In other words, the variance of Ă depends only on the sample size and not on the size of the proportion. Consequently, analyses were conducted using both the raw proportions and the transformed proportions. All results were reported as proportions, however, because Ă in its original units (radians) is not easily interpreted.
To analyze studies in which there were no recidivists for certain categories (Broadhurst & Loh, 2003; Hanson et al., 2007; Peterson et al., 2001) , the recidivism rate (p) was estimated as 1/4n (i.e., Bartlett's adjustment, see Eisenhart, 1947; Cohen, 1988) .
The magnitude and consistency of recidivism rates across studies were calculated using both fixed-effect and random-effects models (Hedges & Vevea, 1998) . Each approach asks slightly different questions and neither approach has won universal acceptance (Whitehead, 2002) . On a conceptual level, the conclusions of the fixedeffect analyses are restricted to the particular set of studies included in the meta-analysis. In contrast, the random-effects model aims for conclusions that apply to the population of studies of which the current sample of studies is a part. In practical terms, the randomeffects model includes an additional between-study error term representing the unexplained variation across studies (a constant). Compared with the fixed-effect model, the random-effects model has higher variance estimates (wider confidence intervals), and the differences in sample size across the studies is given less importance. Consequently, the random-effects model gives relatively more weight to small studies than does the fixed-effect model (approximating unweighted averages).
When the assumptions are violated, the fixed-effect model is too liberal and the random-effects model is too conservative (Overton, 1998) . The results of the randomeffects and fixed-effect models converge as the amount of between-study variability decreases. When the variation between studies is less than would be expected by chance (Q < degrees of freedom, using Cochran's Q statistic; Hedges & Olkin, 1985) , both approaches yield identical results. To test the generalizability of fixed effects across studies, the Q statistic was used:
where p i is the observed proportion in each of k studies and p. is the weighted average. The Q statistic is distributed as a c 2 with k -1 degrees of freedom (k is the number of studies). A significant Q statistic indicates that there is more variability across studies than would be expected by chance. In such cases, further examinations of the data were conducted to establish whether an outlier could be identified. An individual finding was considered to be an outlier if (a) it was an extreme value (highest or lowest), (b) the Q statistic was significant, and (c) the single finding accounted for more than 50% of the value of the Q statistic. When an outlier was detected, the results are reported with and without the exceptional case.
Fixed-effect estimates of recidivism rates were calculated using the formula and procedures presented in Hedges (1994) . Random-effects estimates were calculated using Formulae 10, 12, and 14 from Hedges and Vevea (1998) . Hand calculations or SPSS syntax was used for all analyses. Both fixed-effect and random-effects models were estimated for both the raw proportions (p) and the transformed proportions (Ă).
A total of 2,490 offenders with an average follow-up time of 6.5 years were included in this review. Sexual, violent, and any recidivism were examined separately in the analyses. Table 2 presents the weighted averages of recidivism rates across studies. Table 3 and Figure 1 show the results of the meta-analysis of both raw and transformed proportions. 
For sexual recidivism, the observed recidivism rates ranged from 0% to 10.8%, with a median value of 1.5%. In the nine studies reporting sexual recidivism rates involving 2,416 female sexual offenders, there were 77 sexual recidivists (3.19%). Fixed-effect analyses of the raw proportions and the transformed proportions produced estimates of 1.24% and 2.43%, respectively. Random-effects analyses produced estimates of 2.43% and 2.33%. The analyses showed a greater variability of recidivism among studies than would be expected by chance, and Vandiver (2007) was identified as an outlier. Once Vandiver was removed, the variability between studies was no more than would be expected by chance (Q < df; see Table 3 ). Without Vandiver, fixed-effect and random-effects estimates were the same: 1.00% for the raw proportions and 1.28% for the transformed proportions.
For violent recidivism, of the seven studies involving 2,260 female sexual offenders, there were 146 violent recidivists (6.46%). The observed violent recidivism rates ranged from 1.2% to 16.6%, with a median value of 9.3%. Fixed-effect analyses of the raw proportions and the transformed proportions produced estimates of 4.41% and 5.81%, respectively. Random-effects analyses produced estimates of 7.57% and 7.43%. There was greater variability in the violent recidivism rates across studies than would be expected by chance, and Vandiver (2007) was again identified as the outlier. When the fixed-effect analyses were repeated without the Vandiver study, variability among studies dropped considerably but remained significant (Q = 12.00 and 13.33, respectively, df = 4, p < .05; see Table 3 ). Without Vandiver, the fixed-effect analyses of the raw proportions and the transformed proportions were 3.65% and 4.08%, respectively. Random-effects estimates were 4.64% and 5.54%, respectively.
For any recidivism, of the eight studies involving 2,406 female sexual offenders, there were 590 recidivists (24.42%). The observed rate for recidivism ranged from 11.1% to
Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment 22(4) 45.0%, with a median value of 23.5%. Fixed-effect analyses of the raw proportions and the transformed proportions produced estimates of 22.35% and 23.89%, respectively. Random-effects analyses produced estimates of 23.82% and 23.30%. There was greater variability across studies than would be expected by chance, with Vandiver (2007) being the sole outlier. When the fixed effects analysis was repeated without the Vandiver study, variability among studies dropped considerably but remained significant, Q = 18.61 (raw proportions)] and 18.12 (transformed proportions), df = 6, p < .01; see Table 3 . Without Vandiver, the fixed-effect analyses of the raw proportions and the transformed proportions were 18.96% and 19.40%, respectively. Random-effects estimates were 19.79% and 20.17%, respectively.
This meta-analytic review found that the recidivism rates of female sexual offenders were much lower for all types of crime than the comparable rates for male sexual offenders. Specifically, the women had extremely low rates of sexual recidivism (between 1% and 3%), regardless of the studies included or the method of analysis. Violent (including sexual) recidivism rates were higher but still low: Depending on whether fixed or random effects were examined, violent recidivism rates ranged from 4% to 8%. In contrast, rates for any type of recidivism were higher, ranging from 19% to 24%. These results provide clear evidence that female sexual offenders, once they have been detected and sanctioned by the criminal justice system, tend not to reengage in sexually offending behavior. Most female sexual offenders are not convicted of any new crimes, and of those who are, they are 10 times more likely to be reconvicted for a nonsexual crime than a sexual crime (≈20% vs. ≈2%).
The low recidivism rates of the female sexual offenders are consistent with previous findings showing that, compared with men, women are less likely to be involved with any type of crime (Barker, 2009; Blanchette & Brown, 2006; Kong & AuCoin, 2008; Langan & Levin, 2002) . Depending on the jurisdictions, women constitute approximately 17% to 23% of all adult offenders, although they constitute only about 10% of all violent offenders and 5% of all sexual offenders (Blanchette & Brown, 2006; Cortoni et al., 2009) . Similarly, women also have lower recidivism rates than males. For offenders released from the Correctional Service of Canada during the 1990s, the 2-year reconviction rate for male offenders ranged between 41% and 44%, compared with rates of 23% to 30% for the female offenders (Bonta, Rugge, & Dauvergne, 2003) . The rate of violent recidivism for the women was half that observed for the men in the Correctional Service of Canada samples (6.7% vs. 13.2%). In the United States, 39.9% of the women had been reconvicted for a new offense versus 47.6% of the men in a 3-year follow-up of 272,111 offenders, including 23,674 women (Langan & Levin, 2002 ).
Women's involvement in crime is generally low. The reasons for this are unclearbut the fact is well established (e.g., Blanchette & Brown, 2006) , and it is particularly true of female sexual offenders (Giguere & Bumby, 2007) . Despite low numbers, women are increasingly coming to the attention of the criminal justice system for sexual offenses, thereby increasing the need for appropriate assessment practices. The accumulating evidence suggests that females have particular vulnerabilities that are linked to their sexually offending behavior. Specifically, social and psychological alienation, along with extensive histories of victimization, are particularly common among female sexual offenders (Comack & Brickey, 2007; Gannon, Rose, & Ward, 2008; Johansson-Love & Fremouw, 2006; Pollock, Mullings, & Crouch, 2002; Sommers & Baskin, 1993; Wijkman & Bijleveld, 2008) . For these women, it is likely that their offending is related to early experiences of severe physical and sexual abuse in combination with biological (e.g., genetic factors; Quinsey, Skilling, Lalumière, & Craig, 2004) and social learning variables (e.g., socialization ; Campbell, Muncer, & Bibel, 2001 ). The precise etiological mechanisms mediating the relationship between victimization and subsequent offending are unknown, as of yet.
In the overall collection of studies included in this meta-analysis, there was greater variability than would be expected by chance. Much of this variability could be explained by the high recidivism rates observed by Vandiver (2007) . Vandiver's (2007) study was the only one in which the sexual recidivism rates were virtually identical for the male and female sexual offenders (11.4% vs. 10.8%, respectively). Vandiver (2007) counted as sexual recidivism any offense that led to the registration of the woman as a sexual offender, as defined by the State of Texas. This definition not only included the sexual offences typical of males, such as child molestation, but also included other types of offences, such as compelling prostitution, kidnapping, and Court or Board ordered registration (D. Vandiver, personal communication, October 14, 2008) . The inclusion of prostitution-related offenses likely inflated the rate of sexual recidivism among the female sexual offenders as this type of offences was only present for the women in the study. Consistent definitions facilitate cumulative knowledge. In the male sexual offender literature, there have been sustained efforts to adopt consistent definitions of what constitutes a sexual crime (e.g., Hanson & Morton-Bourgon, 2004; Harris, Phenix, Hanson, & Thornton, 2003; Quinsey et al., 1995) . In the current study, both the Vandiver (2007) and the Sandler and Freeman (2009) data sets included females who were actually only convicted of prostitutionrelated offenses. In contrast, males with only prostitution-related offenses are typically not viewed as sexual offenders. Future research on female sexual offenders would do well to consider standardizing the definitions of sexual offending by women. In particular, researchers should separate prostitution-related offences committed by females from sexual offences involving sexual acts directed toward victims unable or unwilling to consent (i.e., the sexual offences typical of contemporary samples of male sexual offenders).
This study demonstrated the value of meta-analysis in summarizing the recidivism rates across studies. Although it is possible to create averages by simply dividing the aggregated total of recidivists by the aggregated total sample size, meta-analysis provides estimates of the stability of the results. Evaluators and policy makers can have the most confidence in results that are consistent across studies. When there is 398 Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment 22(4) meaningful variation across studies, meta-analysis can identify statistical outliers and moderator variables. Furthermore, meta-analysis will have an essential role in the identification of recidivism risk factors for female sexual offenders. Given the low recidivism rates, very large samples are needed to identify factors that distinguish the recidivists from the nonrecidivists, samples that can most easily be obtained by accumulating female sexual offenders from different settings.
The low base rates of sexual recidivism among female sexual offenders means that risk assessment tools for male sexual offenders will overestimate the recidivism risk of female sexual offenders. Consequently, they should not be used in applied decision making. Given that general (i.e., nonsexual) recidivism is much more common among female sexual offenders than sexual recidivism, evaluators should consider the use of tools validated to assess risk of general and violent (nonsexual) recidivism among these women (e.g., Level of Service Inventory-Revised; Andrews & Bonta, 1995) . Even the use of general risk assessment tools, however, requires an understanding of the general research on risk factors and recidivism among female offenders (e.g., Blanchette & Brown, 2006; Folsom & Atkinson, 2007; Holtfreter & Cupp, 2007; Manchak, Skeem, Douglas, & Siranosian, 2009) .
If the evaluation question specifically concerns the risk for sexual recidivism (e.g., Sexual Violent Predator laws in the United States), then the risk factors must be so blatant that they overcome the presumption of low risk for sexual recidivism implied by the observed base rates. The risk factors for sexual recidivism among females are unknown but could plausibly include the same three general factors generally identified for males (i.e., sexual deviancy, antisociality, intimacy deficits). Research to date, however, indicates that the ways in which these factors manifest themselves in female sexual offenders are different from the typical patterns found in male sexual offenders (see Cortoni, in press , for a review). In addition, the extent to which these factors actually play a role in sexual recidivism among women remains an open question.
Sirs, Increased serum prolactin (PRL) levels have been demonstrated in several autoimmune diseases including polymyositis (PM) and systemic sclerosis (SSc) [1] [2] [3] . PRL is produced by the lactotrophs of the pituitary gland, but the immune cells can produce PRL as well, and PRL acts as a cytokine with role in B, T, and dendritic cell maturation [1] . Czuwara-Ladykowska et al.
[4] demonstrated higher PRL mRNA synthesis in lymphocytes from patients suVering from SSc than in healthy individuals. Multiple promoters regulate PRL gene transcription. Unlike the pituitary production controlled by the pituitary promoter under the inXuence of transcriptional factor Pit-1, the extrapituitary (including that by immune cells) PRL secretion is regulated by the Pit-1 independent alternative promoter located 5840 bp distal to the start of the PRL transcriptional site [5] . This extrapituitary promoter contains functional single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) ¡1149 G/T (rs1341239) in the GATA sequence; G allele leads to higher PRL mRNA in lymphocytes synthesis [6] . GG genotype has been associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) [6, 7] , while TT genotype was identiWed as protective for non-Hodgkin and follicular lymphoma, and rheumatoid arthritis development [8, 9] .
In this study, we looked for distribution of allele and genotype of the ¡1149 G/T SNP of the extrapituitary PRL promoter in 75 patients with SSc (average age 61.4), in 47 subjects with PM (average age 57.8), in 68 patients with dermatomyositis (DM) (average age 58.3), and in 123 healthy Czech individuals (blood donors and medical students, average age 39.7). SSc and PM/DM patients met classiWcation criteria for these illnesses [10, 11] . PCR-RFLP methodology was used for ¡1149G/T SNP detection [7] . BrieXy, we ampliWed 137 bp region of the PRL extrapituitary promoter and for restriction used ApoI endonuclease. We determined the following genotypes: the homozygote TT characterized by 120 + 17 bp, the homozygote GG by 85 + 35 + 17 bp, and the heterozygote GT by 120 + 85 + 35 + 17 bp DNA fragments. Results were evaluated by 2 test with Bonferroni correction. Control group was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
The genotype and allele distribution did not show any signiWcant diVerences in groups of PM, DM, and SSc patients compared to healthy individuals (Table 1) , and we detected neither gender distribution diVerences (data not shown) nor correlation with speciWc clinical or serological manifestation of these diseases (lung Wbrosis, type of scleroderma, antiScl-70 and antiJo-1 positivity) (Table 1) . However, we found a signiWcant inverse association between TT genotype in SSc patients with disease onset after 45 years compared to individuals with SSc and diseases onset prior to 45 years (2/47 = 4.1 vs. 6/18 = 25%, respectively; P corrected = 0.02; OR = 0.13; CI (95%): 0.02-0.69).
Thus, genotype ¡1149 TT of the extrapituitary PRL promoter SNP (via reduced PRL promoter activity and consequently lower PRL levels in lymphocytes) seems to be associated with decreased risk to SSc development in older age. With regards to the age of onset, no diferences in allele or genotype frequences in patients with polymyositis and dermatomyositis were found. We can assume that this polymorphism might be somewhat speciWc for SSc and therefore warrants further investigation into PRL genetics and its levels during the disease course. 
Cardiac myosin contains one mole each of essential light chain (LC1) and regulatory light chain (LC2) on each of the two myosin heads.78 These light chains are also subject to transitions from one isotype to another by external factors.9'0 One of the light chains, the phosphorylatable LC2, appears to be sensitive to the presence of proteolytic enzymes under certain conditions. For example, slow degradation of skeletal muscle myosin LC2 occurred over a period of storage." More significantly, LC2 is greatly reduced or absent in freshly prepared cardiac myosin from myopathic hamsters. '2 
Frequent attempts have been made to evaluate myosin from cardiac tissue in humans suffering from a variety of heart diseases to comprehend the molecular basis of the pathophysiology of this disorder. The findings have been inconsistent. A possible explanation for conflicting reports based on human heart experiments may be the diversity or complexity of the cardiomyopathy being investigated. Idiopathic dilated (or congestive) cardio-myopathy (IDC) is the result of a variety of insults13 and is by definition a disease of unknown etiology14 as opposed to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which may in some cases be associated with a genetic defect in myosin heavy chain. 15 Regardless of the inciting cause, the natural history of the disease is not well-defined because the presenting symptoms are those of heart failure, basically the end stage of the condition. 16 '7 Histologically, the picture reveals diffuse fibrosis and in some cases, small focal scars. 18 The progression of the disease from onset of symptoms to terminal heart failure is quite variable, and in some cases occurs within months and in others takes years, with the same final appearance of the heart. As a result, patients with IDC usually are diagnosed when symptoms of heart failure occur and other causes of heart failure are eliminated; thus, the disease tends to appear well past the initial insult.16'17 Furthermore, recent reports have shown a decrease in the myofibrillar content of myocytes from patients with IDC.1920 On the basis of the above considerations, we undertook an examination of the contractile proteins in hearts excised at transplant time, which provided fresh tissue for analysis of the contractile apparatus. In this communication, we report that the LC1-to-LC2 ratio, which is normally 1 in cardiac myosin, is reduced to 1/0.1 to 1/0.69 in patients with IDC. Furthermore, we have identified a neutral protease present at a threefold to fivefold higher activity in IDC samples over control hearts. This particular neutral protease had a high degree of substrate specificity for human heart myosin LC2, unlike that found in the hamster cardiomyopathy model,12 which cleaved LC2 equally extensively in rabbit skeletal or cardiac myosin. The modified, LC2-deficient myosin has been shown to possess a lower Vm for the actin-activated MgATPase, and synthetic thick filaments prepared from it tended to be shorter by 50% or more when compared with control myosin filaments. Methods
In all, 17 hearts were obtained at the time of transplant (see Table 1 ). All patients except No. 29 were in New York Heart Association class III or IV heart failure and receiving appropriate medications. Case 29 had intractable ventricular tachycardia, and case K had Eisenmenger's complex with severe pulmonary hypertension for which a heart-lung transplant had been performed. Upon excision, the hearts were placed in Krebs-Henseleit solution buffered with 10 mM HEPES to pH 7.4 at 4-5°C. The epicardial arteries, veins, and when present, bypass grafts were removed for other studies. The remainder of the left and right ventricles were diced into 1-1.5-cm3 sections, the epicardial fat was dissected away, and the cubes were placed in a buffer consisting of 50% glycerol, 0.03 M KCl, 0.01 M K2HPO4, 5 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (pH 6.5). At this time, tissue for scanning and transmission electron microscopy and light microscopy was prepared for diagnosis.21 '22 The samples were stored at 4°C for 24 hours and were then placed in fresh 50% glycerol buffer, quick-frozen in dry ice. At the time of dissection, obvious scars and areas of grossly visible diffuse fibrosis were avoided. All of the hearts available were hypertrophied to varying degrees. The hearts diagnosed as IDC were the experimental group, and all others were considered controls. In some cases, a single heart did not supply enough tissue and had to be combined with others. This is indicated in Table 1 . Twenty to 40 arterial rings were obtained from each heart and subjected to a variety of functional tests.23 '24 All rings were embedded in paraffin, and the amounts of intimal thickening, atherosclerosis, and medial thickness were evaluated using a Bioquant system. Regions of atherosclerosis when present were noted. The IDC patients had either no or minimal atherosclerosis, i.e., no plaque region involving more than 20% of the lumen. Of the atherosclerotic patients, all had at least 90-100% occlusive old plaques corresponding to the region or regions of infarction.
Human cardiac tissue was washed several times with 0.03 M KCl, 0.01 M potassium phosphate (pH 7.0), 1 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, and was then ground. Myofibrils were prepared from ground tissue according to the method of Solaro et al, 25 and myosin was extracted by the procedure described before.26 Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF, 0.1 mM) and N-p-tosyl-lysine chloromethyl ketone (TLCK, 0.015 mM) were included in buffers used for myofibrillar protein preparations from control tissues. Myosin was further purified by chromatography on a DE52 column equilibrated in 0.02 M sodium pyrophosphate27 to remove actin and tropomyosin. Myosin subfragment 1 (S1) was prepared by a-chymotryptic digestion,27 and rabbit skeletal muscle actin was prepared from acetone-dried muscle residue by the A TPase Assays Steady-state rates of ATP hydrolysis were measured by the colorimetric determination of phosphate37 at the indicated actin concentrations using the method of initial rates. The dependence of rate on actin concentration was fitted using a computer program that uses a nonlinear least-squares simplex method.
The kinetics of ATP binding to myosin and Si were measured in 0.6 M NaCI, 20 mM imidazole (pH 7.0), and 2 mM MgCl2 at 15°C from the increase in tryptophan fluorescence observed upon mixing protein with ATP in a stopped-flow fluorometer.37 The excitation wavelength was 295 nm, and emission wavelength was 320-380 nm. Data were collected with a Nicolet III oscilloscope and then transferred to a Zenith 148 personal computer for analysis and long-term storage.
Observed rate constants, k0b,, were obtained by fitting the equation I(t)=oe-kobs+C by the method of moments, where I is the observed fluorescence intensity, and I0 is the amplitude of fluorescence change. 38 
The rate and extent of myosin aggregation caused by self-association into filamentous polymers was measured by injecting 0.2 ml of 2.0-mg/ml stock myosin in 0.6 M KCI, 20 mM imidazole (pH 7.0), 0.5 mM DTT, and 5 mM MgCl2 with a spring-loaded Hamilton syringe into a rapidly stirring solution of 1.6 ml of 0.1 M KCI in the same buffer. Aggregation was quantified with a Spex fluorolog spectrofluorometer using the amount of 340-nm light scattered at 900.
The procedure used to isolate the crude protease from myopathic heart tissue was similar to that used to isolate it from hamster hearts.1239 After eluting the protein from a Sephacryl S-200 column equilibrated in 0.4 M KCl, 0.05 M potassium phosphate (pH 7.0), 2 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT, the fractions containing proteolytic activity were pooled and sometimes used as such to digest human and canine cardiac myosin. The crude preparation was further purified using the following steps: It was first dialyzed against 0.05 M sodium acetate, pH 5.5, 1 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA, at which point a noticeable amount of protein precipitated. After spinning, both the supernatant and precipitate were assayed for activity. All the activity remained in the supernatant, which was applied to a CM52 column in the sodium acetate/EDTA buffer. After washing with the starting buffer, the retarded proteins were eluted with a linear NaCl gradient in the same buffer. The eluted active fractions were pooled and further purified on a heparin-Sepharose-Cl affinity column (bed volphate (pH 7.0), 2 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT. Heparin-Sepharose-Cl has been shown to be useful in the purification of a large number of proteins and in particular enzymes either by binding impurities or by binding the specific protein desired, releasing individual proteins at characteristic ionic strength.40,41 The column was washed with this buffer, and the retarded proteins were eluted with stepwise application of 0.1, 0.3, 0.6, 1.0, and 2.0 M NaCI in starting buffer. The active fractions were not retained by the column. Although several contaminating proteins were separated, the final preparation was still not pure, and a number of protein bands were still visible on SDS gels stained with silver. However, the purity of the protease at this stage was sufficient to demonstrate its presence in the myopathic heart and its specificity for LC2 in human cardiac myosin.
Fractions from the chromatographic columns during purification were monitored for protease activity using 3H-casein as substrate. Relative specific activities were expressed as cpm/OD280. Assays were done at 40°C, and liberated 3H was counted after stopping the reaction with TCA.12 To test the activity of the protease on LC2, it was incubated overnight with canine and control human heart and rabbit skeletal myosins in 0.45 M KCI, 0.01 M imidazole (pH 7.0), 2 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DPI as described before.2642 The following day, the mixture was dialyzed against a low-ionic strength buffer containing PMSF to precipitate the digested myosin. Both the supernatant and the precipitate were run on SDS-PAGE to monitor the extent of digestion. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the control and IDC cases used in this study. The major difference between the structures of myosins isolated from control and myopathic heart tissue was in the content of LC2 present as revealed by quantitative SDS-PAGE ( Figure  1) . Because of the limited amount of material available, cardiac tissue from cases 9, 10, and 11 (see Table 1 ) were combined for the preparation of control myosin. The relative molar ratio of LC1 to LC2 in this preparation was 1:1.0 ( Figure 1A and Table 1 ), i.e., a full complement of both light chains was present in myosin. The content of LC2 in myopathic myosin, on the other hand, was reduced appreciably ( Figure 1B) . The relative molar ratio of LC1 to LC2 in the myosin preparation of case 22 was 1:0.2, i.e., LC2 was reduced to 20% of LC1. In almost all of the control myosin preparations from cases 11, 24, and 77, the LC1/LC2 ratio remained nearly constant (1:1.0, 1:1.2, 1:0.9, and 1:0.9, respectively; Table 1 ). In case 24, the ratio was 1:1.2 in myofibrils and remained essentially the same at 1:0.9 when myosin was purified from the same sample. However, the LC1/LC2 ratio in all of the IDC cases not only varied but was always less than 1. In case 48, the ratio was less than 1:0.1 ( Figure  1D ) when compared with control myosin ( Figure 1C ).

When Western blots were semiquantified in one case (case 22), it was found that the LC2 level in myopathic myosin was reduced to background level, whereas control levels of LC2 remained positive and comparable to LCI levels.
Kinetics ofA TP Binding to Normal and Myopathic
Human Heart Myosins The fluorescence increase observed upon mixing human cardiac myosin with ATP in a stopped-flow fluorometer were fitted to a single rate constant, k,b,. The dependence of k0,, on the rate of ATP binding to normal and myopathic human cardiac myosin on ATP concentration is shown in Figure 2A . There is no These same parameters were calculated using Si from both myosins ( Figure 2B ). Figure 4 . The initial rate of increase in turbidity was very fast and apparently similar in all of the myosins tested. However, the extent of turbidity (maximum absorbance at 340 nm, 1.0 OD unit) in normal ( Figure 4A ) or myopathic myosin recombined with LC2 ( Figure 4C ) was about double that of the myopathic myosin (maximum absorbance at 340 nm, 0.6 OD unit, Figure 4B ). Because intensity of turbidity is directly related to size of the scattering particles (i.e., the bigger the particle, the larger the turbidity), similar results should be obtained by actually observing the filaments formed. This was confirmed by electron microscopic analysis of synthetic thick filaments formed by each type of myosin ( Figure 5 ). Comparison of various filaments stained with uranyl acetate indicates that synthetic thick filaments from normal ( Figure 5A ) human cardiac myosin were 0.7-2.0 ,um in length, with a clear bare zone and crossbridges on either side of the central bare zone. The positively contrasted control filaments ( Figure 5B) tend to appear relatively thinner, but again, the crossbridges seem to project almost at right angles to the filament shaft. Myopathic filaments, on the other hand, were generally shorter, about 0.35-0.5 ,um long ( Figure 5C ), with a relatively stubby appearance caused by the clustering of crossbridges at opposite sides of the bare zone instead of the more tapered tips seen in normal myosin filaments. Myopathic filaments after LC2 reassociation were essentially 0.5-1.8 ,um long ( Figure 5D ), i.e., as long as the controls, and also normal in shape with pointed tips rather than the more knobby, blunt tips seen in myopathic filaments.
The changes in filament size appeared to be regulated by the composition of the myosin head; thus, to determine whether the tail of myosin had any influence on assembly, the ability of myosin rod to form ordered aggregates was monitored using a comparative approach involving rod preparations from both control and myopathic heart myosin. For this, we chose conditions favoring generation of three-dimensional quasicrystalline assemblies found in gizzard myosin,36which produced highly ordered aggregates. Figure 6 shows the results of electron microscopy of epoxy-embedded paracrystals formed from rod preparations of both control and myopathic myosin sectioned in various planes. When these new paracrystalline forms were sectioned through the planes indicated in Figure 6B , neither the control ( Figures 6A and 6C ) nor the myopathic ( Figures 6D and 6E ) rod paracrystals revealed any difference in structure or in their packing order. In Figure 6C , the section through plane A-A reveals an axial repeat of about 14 nm. The same periodicity is found in sections through the B-B plane of the myopathic rod paracrystal shown in Figures 6D and 6E . In Figure 6D , small arrows indicate the microperiod of 14 nm, and the large arrow indicates the wider spacing at 21-24 nm, the main structural feature of the paracrys- tals that appears to be a fiber formed of many rod elements.
The kinetic results of ATP binding and hydrolysis and the differences among the calculated values of Vm and Km, suggested the existence of subtle differences in the structure of myosin heavy chain other than the absence of LC2 alone in myopathic myosin. One way to monitor subtle differences was to use limited tryptic digestion31 and measure the kinetic rates of proteolysis of Si heavy chain from control and myopathic myosin. The end result of limited tryptic digestion is the generation of three structural domains with Mrs of 25-50-20 kDa, as indicated in the gel pictures of trypsin-cleaved Si from normal ( Figure 7A ) and myopathic ( Figure 7B ) myosins. Although the gel pictures do not reveal a striking difference in the susceptibilities of normal and myopathic Si to trypsin, when they were traced, the myopathic Si heavy chain revealed somewhat greater resistance to tryptic cleavage. The rate of disappearance of Si heavy chain obtained from densitometer traces of gels seen in Figure 7 was calculated from graphs of the areas of Si heavy chain remaining at each time interval (Figure 8 ). The rate constants of heavy chain hydrolysis computed from the slopes of the plots were 0.10 min' and 0.08 min1 for control and myopathic Si, respectively, suggesting some variability either within the structures or the conformation of Si heavy chains.
It seemed very likely that the lack of LC2 in purified myopathic myosin could be a result of endogenous proteolysis. Consequently, an attempt was made to isolate and purify the responsible protease. The crude protease was obtained after chromatographing the muscle extract (from case 21, for example; Table 1 ) on a Sephacryl S-200 column. The elution profile is shown in Figure 9A . The eluted fractions across the protein peak were assayed for activity, most of which was associated with fractions 29-31. These fractions were pooled, concentrated, clarified by centrifugation, and dialyzed against 0.45 M KCI, 0.01 M imidazole (pH 7.0), 2 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT. To determine whether such a protease was present in control heart tissues, the extract from control heart tissues (from cases 29 and 30, Table  1 ) was subjected to a similar purification step. Figure 9B shows the elution profile. There was some proteolytic 
Circulation Vol 85, No 5 May 1992 activity in fractions 30 and 31; however, the activity associated with these fractions was not only one fourth that shown in Figure 9A (from the IDC case), but it also did not digest LC2 in control myosin. The protease was also isolated from two other samples, cases 28 and 31, which had threefold and fivefold higher activity than that present in control tissues from case 44, case K, and the combined cases 29 and 30 ( Table 1 ).
The crude protease from myopathic heart was then used to establish its specificity for LC2 by incubating it with control human and canine heart myosin as well as rabbit skeletal muscle myosin (at a protease-to-myosin weight ratio of 1 to 30) in 0.45 M KCl, 0.01 M imidazole (pH 7.0), 2 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DYT. The digested myosins were monitored by SDS-PAGE (Figure 10 ). The striking result was that the protease was more specific for human heart myosin than with the others: LC2 visible in control heart myosin ( Figure 1OA ) was almost totally digested (Figure lOB) . In the case of canine heart myosin ( Figure 101 ), there was a substantial amount of LC2 present after digestion ( Figure 1OJ ). The same was true for LC2 or the DTNB light chain ( Figure 1OC ) in rabbit skeletal muscle myosin: Its level appeared to decrease ( Figure IOD) but did not totally disappear. Under similar conditions, the protease from hamster hearts or skeletal muscle totally digested LC2 from both canine heart and rabbit skeletal muscle myosin.122642 In none of the samples shown in Figure 10 was there any evidence of an appreciable degree of heavy chain cleavage, as was the case with the hamster protease.
To evaluate further the possibility of the protease presence in controls, tissues from two separate non-IDC cases (44 and K) were used for protease preparation. Fractions with proteolytic activity were incubated with human heart myosin to determine whether LC2 would be cleaved. The extent of LC2 cleavage was monitored by blotting the gels onto nitrocellulose paper and revealing LC2 transfer by anti-LC2 antibody. LC2 was prominently revealed in control myosin ( Figure 1OE) ; however, when myosin was incubated with protease fractions eluted early from the column from the extract of case 44, there was very little digestion of LC2 ( Figure  1OF ). The extent of digestion increased with a later fraction from the same preparation (Figure lOG) . The degree of degradation of LC2 was somewhat less when using fractions with protease activity from case K (Figure IOH) .
The steps required to partially purify the protease included the following steps: the crude preparation (from case 28) was dialyzed against 0.05 M NaOAc (pH 5.5), 2 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT,39 which resulted in the precipitation of some of the proteins present. Both the supernatant and the precipitated material were assayed for activity. The activity remained in the supernatant, which was applied to a MonoS (HR 10/10) FPLC column equilibrated in the same buffer. The bound proteins were eluted with a linear NaCl gradient (0-0.5 M in the starting buffer), and fractions were monitored at 235 nm to optimize detection. Proteolytic activity was confined to fractions 32-35 eluted between 0.2 and 0.29 M NaCI. These fractions were pooled, dialyzed against 0.05 M potassium phosphate (pH 7.0), 2 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT, and applied to a heparin-Sepharose-Cl affinity column; the protein was eluted with stepwise NaCI gradient, and active protease fractions were eluted unretarded. At this point, there was about 130-fold purification with respect to the crude preparation. Fractions with protease activity were pooled and dialyzed against 0.02 M Tris-HCI (pH 8.0), 2 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT and chromatographed on a MonoQ (HR 5/5) FPLC column. Two major protein peaks were eluted, but neither demonstrated proteolytic activity, suggesting that the protease was either denatured or extremely diluted such that no activity could be measured.
The question of linking a number of pathological states to an altered function or dysfunction of the Ac 95-* All of the cases of IDC studied here exhibited cardiac hypertrophy, and all were in severe heart failure ( Table  1 ). The only human control tissue available in a state permitting valid examination of myosin were hearts excised at transplant and thus, all abnormal. However, these are considered useful controls because all were clearly hypertrophied and all were in severe heart failure. All patients were receiving a variety of medications for heart failure, although the usual regimen for the atherosclerotic patients did vary from those with Figures 1B and ID) . In one instance (case 31), the LC1/LC2 ratio was determined from the traces of myofibrils run on SDS gels, i.e., at the earliest stage of preparation; this same material was subsequently used for protease preparation. The reduced level of LC2 found in this IDC case confirms the conclusion that the reduction in LC2 content correlates with the substantial presence of active protease. Also, this result argues against proteolysis of LC2 occurring during later stages of the protein preparation during which proteolysis might conceivably be facilitated. Thus, the modification in the structure of myopathic myosin provided impetus to analyze its functional properties, namely, its ability to bind and hydrolyze ATP, its affinity for actin, and its self-assembly into ordered aggregates or thick filaments.
Several of these properties were influenced by cardiomyopathy: The rate of ATP binding (Figure 2 ), steadystate ATP hydrolysis (Figure 3) , and affinity for actin were all diminished.
Some assembly properties were also destabilized: There was no difference between the ability of control and myopathic myosin rod to form the paracrystalline structure shown in Figure 6 . Synthetic thick filaments from myopathic myosin, on the other hand, despite having the same outward morphology (i.e., bipolar structures with a bare zone, myosin heads projecting outward from the filament surface on either side of the bare zone), were consistently and significantly shorter than those from control myosin, terminating in a knobby structural feature. The absence of LC2 in myopathic myosin thus appeared to lead to the formation of shorter, stunted filaments, because when myopathic myosin was recombined with LC2, the filament lengths were comparable to those of normal filaments ( Figure  5 ), as reported earlier46 and subsequently confirmed.35
These changes were confirmed by light-scattering measurements in which turbidity is a direct function of particle size. Thus, two independent methods generated fundamentally identical results. Myopathic myosin is thus judged to be defective in the globular SI head, There have been a number of studies of the genetic composition of patients with IDC implicating the immune system.50.51 There would appear to be an excess of specific human leukocyte antigen molecules in the population with the disease, although there is not complete agreement as to which specific haplotypes are involved. The presence of specific haplotypes occurs in one third to one half of the cases and in a small percentage of control subjects. Besides involvement of the cellular component of the immune system, humoral antibodies to a variety of myocyte intracellular antigens are demonstrable in patients with IDC.5253 Studies involving the immune system are generally retrospective, and the incidence of a prior insult, especially viral myocarditis, is unknown but assumed to be high. However, the immune system is thought to be involved in one third to one half of the cases of IDC.51,52,54 If it is accepted that a specific insult occurring in a properly prepared host (i.e., the correct haplotype) results in a higher probability of IDC than in an individual with a dissimilar HLA makeup, it then follows that there could be other underlying host conditions predisposing development of IDC after an insult. The underlying condition may involve the cardiac myocyte and be sufficiently benign as to be unnoticeable until an initiating cause occurs, as with the HLA subtypes prone to develop IDC.
In the cases described here, the absence of LC2 was due to the presence of a protease that was either synthesized de novo during cardiomyopathy or present in reduced amount or in an inactive state until it was activated. The latter possibility seems to be more likely in humans, because its presence was detectable at low levels in the preparation shown in Figure 9B from the combined tissues of control cases 29 and 30 and from control cases 44 and K (Table 1 ). There are other proteases present in the heart or skeletal muscle tissues,55 but some of these lack a clear specificity and/or are involved in regulating normal protein turnover in these tissues. The protease described here is unique in that it is even more specific for human LC2 than that isolated from hamsters. It does not attack the myosin heavy chain at all, as shown in Figure 1B , or else heavychain cleavage is negligible. Furthermore, it did not hydrolyze LC2 as readily in canine heart or rabbit skeletal myosin ( Figure 10 ).
What emerges, therefore, is a comprehensive picture of a possible molecular mechanism of interdependent changes (as indicated by the parameters evaluated in this study and summarized in a simplified manner in Table 2 ) upon onset of cardiomyopathy: Probably the activation of the protease or its de novo synthesis is the critical step. Regardless of the mechanism of activation and/or synthesis of the protease, once active, it hydrolyzes LC2. Eventually, the rate of LC2 breakdown surpasses that of its synthesis, resulting in myosin with substoichiometric amounts of LC2 that subsequently form shorter filaments in in vitro preparations and have altered ATPase activity. If a similar reduction in size were to occur in the sarcomere, it would most likely lead to a generalized destabilization within the lattice geometry of the sarcomere, eventually leading to a collapse of contractile function and distinct morphological changes as reported. 20 The results discussed here would allow the inference of such a sequence of changes to explain the molecular basis of cardiomyopathy at the level of the major contractile protein, myosin, identifying it directly as being the critical target upon which the degenerative effects of the protease are impacted.
During tumorigenesis, cancer cells increase the production of ribosomes to support the higher rate of protein synthesis associated with cancer growth. This is supported by the increase in rRNA synthesis transcribed in the nucleolus by RNA polymerase I, and correlates with adverse prognosis [1] [2] [3] . To contrast this mechanism, the products of Rb and p53, two important tumour suppressor genes, negatively interfere with the RNA polymerase I and the assembly of the transcriptional machinery on the rDNA promoter [4, 5] . p53 activation is under direct control of the negative regulator MDM2, which in turn is inactivated by ARF. This explains why ARF is pivotal for triggering the cell-cycle arrest and the apoptotic programme after oncogenic cues [6] . The stability of ARF is significantly increased in cells that overexpress exogenous B23 (known also as nucleophosmin, numatrim, and NOR38). B23 associates with ARF within the nucleolus, delaying its turnover. As a consequence, the inhibition of B23 by shRNA has destabilizing effects over ARF [7] . ARF mutants unable to bind B23 are unstable and functionally impaired [8] . In mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) lacking both B23 and p53, ARF is mainly found outside the nucleolus and with a shortened half-life, conferring the cells with higher proliferation rates [9] . B23 is an abundant, multifunctional protein present at high amount in the granular region of nucleoli [10] . It is involved in the regulation of ribosome biogenesis, and the control of genome stability and survival in response to a variety of stress stimuli [11] [12] [13] . In fact, B23 −/− fibroblasts become aneuploid and have increased levels of P53 in a stable form [7] . Conversely, B23 has been shown to induce senescence in normal primary fibroblasts [14] and its overexpression in tumors lacking p53 is known to promote proliferation [15] . The transcription factor EGR1 (early growth response protein 1) is involved in the transcriptional regulation of responses to a wide number of proliferative, differentiation and stress stimuli [16, 17] . In particular, EGR1 regulates the expression of key genes, including p53, TGFB, CDKN1A/p21 and PTEN, involved in the growth and division of cancer cells, [18] [19] [20] . Egr-1 +/− and Egr-1 −/− MEFs bypass senescence and grow as typically immortalized cells. Besides to cover the role as "gatekeeper" of p53-dependent growth regulatory mechanisms [18] , EGR1 has been suggested to play a role as tumour suppressor in several tumor types [21] [22] [23] . We have recently demonstrated that EGR1 behaves as a negative regulator of RNA polymerase I [24] . EGR1 localizes to the nucleolus and the more it is expressed the less is the 47S pre-rRNA synthesized. ARF is required for the nucleolar localization of EGR1. Indeed, in cells ARF −/− such as the NIH-3 T3 Egr1 does not keep the nucleolar localization and the ability to suppress the synthesis of the 47S ribosomal precursor [24] . In view of the functional interaction of ARF with B23, and the fact that EGR1 regulates the transcription of ARF [25] we have hypothesized that EGR1 might extend its control also on B23 expression. Here, we show that EGR1 promotes its stability and the transcription of B23 gene.
The expression of nucleolar B23 correlates with the levels of EGR1
To verify our hypothesis we first monitored the effects on the expression of B23 in HeLa cells by either increasing or reducing the levels of EGR1. After transient transfection of the pEGFP-EGR1 expression vector, showed a six-fold increase of B23 mRNA in low serum conditions (Fig. 1a) . No changes were observed under culture conditions with 10 % FBS. Accordingly, lowering the EGR1 mRNA levels with siRNA specific to EGR1 sequence, we observed a significant reduction of B23 mRNA levels compared to cells treated with non-specific (scrambled) siRNA ( Fig. 1d upper panel) . Here again, the inhibitory effect on B23 mRNA synthesis was observed only in cells cultured in low serum conditions, and not in presence of 10 % FBS. Similar changes were observed with the B23 protein synthesis under the same experimental conditions. In summary, in condition of serum deprivation the B23 mRNA and protein levels increased after EGR1 overexpression and decreased after EGR1 silencing.
To verify that the above results in HeLa cells are not dependent upon the specific cellular context, we replicated the experiments with a primary culture of human lung tumor and a glioblastoma derived established cell line, U87MG and 293 T (Additional file 1: Figure S1 ). In all these cultures the B23 mRNA and protein underwent variations in their levels similar to those observed in HeLa under the same experimental conditions. We conclude that the levels of B23 expression are strongly influenced by EGR1 under lower FBS concentration, a known stress inducing condition.
To investigate whether EGR1 can influence the expression of B23 under different stress conditions, we sought to examine their response to actinomycin D, a genotoxic agent known to inhibit the RNA Polymerase I and II activity and to induce DNA damage [26] . The levels of EGR1 and B23 mRNA and protein showed a step-wise increase when cells were treated with increasing concentrations (0.04, 0.5, and 1 μg/ml) of actinomycin D (Fig. 2a-b -e-f-g). Also the expression of p300, a specific EGR1 target gene, increases, whereas the synthesis of 47S and 45S is strongly inhibited, as shown in Fig. 2c-d . Pre-treatment with EGR1 silencing siRNA abolished the response of B23 and p300 genes and restored the production of 47S rRNA ( Fig. 2c-d) . Finally, we asked the question of whether the B23 protein would translocate to the nucleoplasm in response to Pol I-induced transcription repression, as suggested by Yao Z. et al. [27] . We confirm that in our experimental conditions actinomycin D causes the translocation of B23 to the nucleoplasm (Additional file 2: Figure S2 ).
Since the levels of B23 expression vary in response to EGR1, we hypothesized that as a transcriptional regulator it might control the B23 expression by interacting with the promoter. To verify this hypothesis, we first searched the B23 promoter (NCBI, Accession: NG_016018) for the presence of canonical sequences that were recognized and bound by-EGR1.
By-bioinformatics-approach (http://bip.weizmann.ac.il/ index.html) one of such elements was found at −172 bp to the TATA box (Fig. 3a) . To establish the function of the putative EGR1 binding site, we cloned a partial sequence of the B23 promoter (4328 to 5240 bp) from HeLa DNA and inserted into a luciferase reporter gene to assay the responsiveness to the activity of EGR1. As above, EGR1 was exogenously expressed following transient transfection of the pEGFP-EGR1 expression vector. All experiments were carried out in HeLa cells cultured in low serum conditions (0.2 % FBS). The B23 minimal promoter carrying the sequence of the EGR1 binding site found in HeLa was successfully transactivated by the exogenously expressed EGR1, providing high levels of luciferase activity (Fig. 3b) . No luciferase activity was detected when the B23 minimal promoter was deleted of the sequence or carried a mutated version of the EGR1 binding site and tested in the same conditions as above ( Fig. 3a-b) .
In vitro DNA binding assays were performed to establish whether EGR1 specifically associated with the minimal B23 promoter. We incubated DNA fragments of the promoter sequence with anti-EGR1 antibody in presence of extracts of HeLa cells either transfected with full length EGR1 or EGFP [24] . Cells were cultured either in low serum conditions or at 10 % FBS. An abundant (about twenty-fold) enrichment of promoter sequences was obtained by RT-qPCR ( Fig. 3c-d ) and PCR (Additional file 3: Figure S3 ) only with extracts of cells transfected with EGR1 and cultured in low serum. No statistically significant differences were detected in 10 % FBS. Furthermore, when the PCR was performed with oligonucleotides specific for a region located upstream the minimal B23 promoter no amplification products were obtained (data not shown).
In order to gain further evidence about the role of EGR1 as a regulator of B23 expression, we compared the levels of B23 mRNA and protein from brain of Egr1 −/− with Egr1 +/+ mice. Since EGR1 is present at high levels in mouse and human brain [28] but not, the levels of B23 expression should likely be different in the brain of wild-type compared to Egr1 −/− mice, in case B23 were regulated by EGR1. A significant reduction of B23 mRNA and protein was detected in the brain of Egr1 −/− mice (Fig. 4) . B23 increases the EGR1 steady-state level of expression B23 plays an important role in cell growth by regulating the function of proteins such as ARF and p53 [29] . This is accomplished by delaying the turnover of these proteins, thus contributing to the activation of suppressor activities aimed to the control of cell cycle. In the case of ARF, a physical interaction with B23 has been demonstrated which protected ARF from proteasomal degradation [29] . We asked the question of whether a similar interaction might exist also between EGR1 and B23. If B23 stabilizes EGR1, then a fall in the B23 synthesis would likely translate into a change in the detectable levels of EGR1, due to a loss of stability. To test this hypothesis, we treated the HeLa cells with 30nM B23 specific siRNA, and monitored the expression of both genes EGR1 and B23. We show that following a decrease of B23 mRNA and protein, the levels of EGR1 mRNA remained unchanged (Fig. 5c) . However, the levels of EGR1 protein detected by immunoblotting were significantly lower (Fig. 5a-b) . We also confirm that under the same experimental conditions the level of 47S pre-rRNA increased whereas the level of p300 diminished, both significantly ( Fig. 5d-e) . To investigate whether the lower levels of EGR1 protein following B23 silencing were the result of a proteasome-dependent degradation, we tested in HeLa cells the effect of the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 (at the concentration of 10 μM) on the stability of EGR1 during B23 silencing after 16, 20, and 24 h. Only after 16 h from the treatment the levels of EGR1 did actually increase (Fig. 5f-g ). These experiments clearly suggest the partial involvement of proteasome machinery on EGR1 turnover, and that, EGR1 stability and accumulation within the nucleolus is likely regulated by B23.
B23 (also known as NPM1, nucleophosmin, nucleoplasmin, NO38, and numatrin) is the best studied member of the NPM family of chaperones, a highly conserved protein found in humans, rodents, chicken and fish. Human B23 is mapped to chromosome 5q35 and is made up of 12 exons. B23, first isolated from Xenopus laevis oocyte extracts [30] is a histone storage protein affecting many intracellular processes such as: i) the rate of ribosome synthesis by binding to pre-ribosomal complexes; ii) DNA duplication and transcriptional regulation; iii) nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling and assistance to small basic proteins such as REV, REX, TAT and p120 for transport to the nucleolus [31] [32] [33] [34] . Within the nucleolus, In a recent publication, we have shown that the transcriptional factor EGR1 also localizes to the nucleolus and acts as negative regulator of RNA polymerase I activity, similarly to p53 [24] . Both B23 and EGR1 are activated and expressed under at least two different stress stimuli, i.e., after UV exposure and H 2 O 2 treatment [35, 36] . We do not know whether the two genes are independently. To investigate this hypothesis, we conducted a series of experiments where HeLa cells grown in serum deprived conditions and treated either to express high levels of exogenous EGR1 or to silence the expression of the endogenous EGR1 gene, were examined for changes in the localization and the expression of B23 mRNA and protein, and in the regulation of 47S and 45S pre-rRNA synthesis. The above results show that both pre-rRNAs (47S and 
) have a rise in their levels when EGR1 is silenced. Though very preliminar this observation leading us to hypothesize that the regulation of 47S could be not an abortive transcription. However, further investigations will help us to clarify this point. Here we show that in HeLa cells the levels of B23 mRNA and protein increase after EGR1 overexpression, and decrease after EGR1 silencing. We know that this correlation is not cell specific. In fact, very similar results were obtained also with established glioma cell line and a primary culture of lung adenocarcinoma. In addition, the same effect can be assumed in vivo for the brain of B23 by comparing the expression levels of B23 in the brain of EGR1 −/− with that from EGR1 +/+ mice. An investigation of the human and mouse B23 promoter nucleotide sequence allowed the recognition of a potential EGR1 binding site, which proved to be effective in a reporter gene transactivation assay. The association of EGR1 to the B23 promoter was further demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). It has been shown that following DNA damage B23 binds to chromatin [37] and to other proteins as well, such as GADD45 [38] , the retinoblastoma protein pRB [39] , PARP1 and PARP2 [40] . They are all intimately linked to the maintenance of DNA structure, replication or repair. Following treatment with actinomycin D, nucleolar B23 protein undergoes a rapid translocation to the nucleoplasm [41] . Here we confirm these data and find that the levels of both EGR1 and B23 increase with different concentrations of the drug. However, if cells are treated under conditions inhibiting the expression of EGR1, then the levels of B23 remain constant. One of the mechanism of actinomycin D is inhibit the transcription by intercalating with DNA, in particular at the GC-rich RNA Polymerase I genes. In our experiments EGR1 seem to facilitate the action of genotoxic drug. We have already demonstrate in a previous paper that EGR1 bind UBF protein and the formation of this proteins complex could help the action of Actinomycin D on the inhibition of RNA Polymerase I gene. This is only one of the possible scenario further experiments will help to clarify the role of EGR1 under actinomycin action. These data further suggest a direct role for EGR1 in regulating the expression of B23, and that the correlation between EGR1 and B23 is maintained under several conditions of cellular stress. Several studies have demonstrated the involvement of B23 in the p53 tumor suppressor pathway. Colombo et al. found that B23 when overexpressed promotes cellular senescence in fibroblasts and regulates the stability of p53 through direct interaction [14] . Further, in response to nucleolar stress, B23 does promote the stabilization of ARF protein [25] . In view of the multiple interactions that link B23 to the above molecules and likely to EGR1, we finally studied the effects of B23 over EGR1. Indeed, by inhibiting the expression of B23 we observed a reduction of EGR1 protein levels but not of EGR1 mRNA. Since MG-132, a proteosomal inhibitor, can reduce this effect we speculate that B23 might have a role for keeping adequate levels of the intracellular concentration of EGR1 following stress conditions.
In summary, these findings provide the evidence that B23 is regulated by EGR1 under stress conditions, and highlights EGR1 as an important link of the ARF-B23-rRNA nucleolar network [42] , regulating ribosome biogenesis and promoting growth arrest.

The cell lines, uterine cervix cancer HeLa (ATCC CCL2), human embryonic kidney 293 T (ATCC CRL-1573) and glioma U87MG (ATCC HTB-14) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 1 % nonessential amino acids, 1 % Lglutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin, 100 IU/ml streptomycin and FBS (Sigma-Aldrich St. Louis, Mo, USA) 10 % or 0.2 % (serum starvation) at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 humidified atmosphere in air. The cell lines used were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection, Rockville MD, USA. The primary lung tumour cells were grown in DMEM-F12 [43] . The research protocol was approved by ethic committee of S. Andrea Hospital, University of Roma Sapienza. The study was conducted using C57BL/6 wild-type and Egr1 deficient mice (Egr-1−/−) [44] . Animals were housed four per cage. All the experiments were performed in accordance with the EU Directive 2010/63/ EU for animal experiments and approved by ethic committee of Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of Roma Sapienza.
RNA extraction was performed after EGR1 silencing, B23 silencing and EGR1 overexpression into HeLa cells. For silencing, EGR1 and B23 pre-designed siRNA (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY USA, 4390822) or scrambled sequence RNA oligonucleotide (Negative Control siRNA 4390846) were transiently transfected at 20, 30 nM or 60 nM using High-Perfect Transfecting Agent (as indicated in the figures) (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) following the Qiagen protocol. The treatment with actinomycin D (Sigma) was performed for 1 h at 37°C at the three concentrations indicated in Fig. 2 . The treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 (Sigma) was performed at 37°C for 16, 20 and 24 h during B23 silencing. For EGR1 overexpression pGFP-EGR1 expression vector [24] was transfected using lipofectamin (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY USA). To analyse the levels of B23 in vivo, total RNA was extracted from female mice of wild type and Egr1 −/− mice. Total RNA extraction and cDNA preparation were accomplished using RNeasy (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and Superscript III RT (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY USA) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. For the silencing and overexpression experiments we used the protocols described previously [24] . Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using Fast SYBR Green Master mix and the StepOnePlus real-time PCR system (both from Applied Biosystems). Each experiment was performed in triplicate. Experiments were independently repeated three times. Gene expression levels were quantified from realtime PCR data by the comparative threshold cycle (CT) method using 18S as an internal control gene. 
Immunoblotting analysis was performed using whole extracts (40 μg) from HeLa cells after silencing and overexpression of EGR1 [23] , or B23 silencing. Total extract (40 μg) were prepared from subconfluent cultures by resuspending cells in RIPA-Buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 6.8, 5 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.5 % NP-40, 0.1 % sodium. Furthermore whole extracts (80 μg) were obtained from brain of nine of wild type and Egr1 −/− female mice of three months using RIPA buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 6.8, 5 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0,5 % NP-40, 0,1 % sodium deoxycholate, protease inhibitor (Sigma), 0.1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) using a Dounce homogenizer. After incubation for 30 min at 0°C the lysate was centrifuged at 10000 rpm × 15 min 4°C. The samples were loaded on SDS-PAGE gel at 8 % or 10 % of acrylamide (Sigma 29:1) and blotted on PVDF (Biorad) using a semidry apparatus (Biorad). After blocking in 5 % dry milk the membrane was incubated with the appropriate antibody. The primary antibodies used are: rabbit polyclonal anti-EGR1 (sc-101, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), mouse monoclonal antibody anti-B23 (ab10530, Abcam), rabbit polyclonal antibody anti-GAPDH (2118, Cell Signaling Technology Biotechnology) and monoclonal antibody anti-actin (sc-47778, Santa Cruz). The secondary antibodies used for western blot are anti-mouse and anti-rabbit (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA). After ECL assay (GE Healthcare) the membrane was incubated with film specific for protein detection (Kodak).
Cloning of the B23 minimal promoter To amplify the proximal B23 promoter region, genomic DNA from HeLa cells was used as template. The primers used are: FW 5'-GGGGGTACCGCTTTCTTTCAGGAGGAAT-3' REV 5'-CCGCTCGAGGGCACGCACTTAGGTAG-3'. To verify the specificity of the PCR amplification, the fragment obtained was excised from agarose gel and isolated using DNA gel extraction kit (Millipore). The PCR product (region 4328 bp to 5240 bp of B23, NPM1, numatrin sequence; Accession: NG_016018) was KpnI/XhoI digested and cloned into the pGL3 basic luciferase vector (Promega). The correct sequence was checked by direct sequence (Applied Biosystem). Site-specific mutations in the EGR1-binding sites within the B23 promoter were made with the QuickChangeII Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). Briefly, primer sequences used to generate point mutations are: FW 5'-GGAAGGAGGCTT AAAGGAGGTAGAAAGGAGTG-3 REV 5'-CACTCCTT TCTACCTCCTTTAAGCCTCCTTCC-3'. PCR reaction conditions were: 95°C for 1 min followed by 18 cycles at 95°C for 50 s, 60°C for 50 s, 68°C for 5 min, then 68°C for 7 min. Following the PCR reaction, the mix was digested by incubating with Dpn I for 1 h at 37°C. Clones of mutated plasmids were replicated in bacteria and screened for the correct mutation by DNA sequencing (Applied Biosystem). Luciferase assay. HeLa cells were seeded into 6-well plates and transfected with 0.3 μg transactivator plasmid pEgr1-GFP, 0.3 μg pB23-Luc or 0.3 μg pB23-mut-Luc, plus 0.5 μg of β-galactosidase vector. At 24 h post-transfection, the levels of luciferase activity were measured sequentially from a single sample using the Luciferase reporter assay system (Promega) with a luminometer (TD-20/20 Turner Design). Measurement of luciferase enzyme activity was assayed on whole-cell extract performed using 20 μl of lysate cleared and 100 μl of Luciferase assay Reagent. The luciferase values were normalized to β-galactosidase activity and protein content. The experiments of luciferase assay were repeated three times in triplicate.
HeLa cells were transfected with full length EGR1 expression vector pEGFEGR1 or pEGFP empty vector using lipofectamine 2000, fixed 48 h after transfection with 1 % formaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature and the reaction stopped by addition of 125 mM glycine for 5 min. The other steps of the ChIP experiments were
Abstract Cocaine use is highly prevalent and a major public health problem. While some studies have reported frequent comorbidity problems among cocaine users, few studies have included evaluation of gambling problems. This study aimed to estimate the prevalence of gambling problems and compare those who were at-risk gamblers with nonproblem gamblers in terms of mental health problems, substance use problems, and some risk factors (i.e. family antecedents, erroneous perceptions and coping strategies) among individuals who smoke or inject cocaine. A total of 424 smoked or injected cocaine users recruited through community-based programs in Montreal (Quebec) completed the questionnaire, including the Canadian Pathological Gambling Index, the Composite International Diagnostic Interview, the CAGE, and the Severity Dependence Scale. Of the sample, 18.4 % were considered at-risk gamblers, of whom 7.8 % had problems gambling and 10.6 % were moderate-risk gamblers. The at-risk group was more likely to have experienced a recent phobic disorder and alcohol problems than the non-problem group. A multivariate analysis showed that, compared to those who were non-problem gamblers, the at-risk ones were more likely to have lost a large sum of money when they first started gambling, believed that their luck would turn, and gambled in reaction to painful life
In 2011, 17 million people worldwide had used cocaine in the last year. A large proportion of these users lived in North America, a continent where the demand for cocaine is highest (UNODC World Drug Report 2014). In Canada, cocaine use affects approximately 1.1 % of individuals above the age of 14 years old (CADUMS 2012) . Cocaine misuse contributes to the development of several psychosocial and health consequences (Lévesque et al. 2014; Riezzo et al. 2012; Smith et al. 2014 ) including social dysfunction, unemployment, mental health problems, HIV and hepatitis C viral infections (Cunha et al. 2010a, b; Hser et al. 2004; Karila et al. 2009 ). It is therefore important to better characterize cocaine users in order to develop effective interventions to reduce the health burden related to problematic cocaine use (McRae et al. 2007) .
Mental health problems are a major concern among individuals addicted to cocaine (Kandel et al. 2001; Vergara-Moragues et al. 2012) . In fact, between 35 and 65 % of cocaine dependent users are diagnosed with a, or multiple, mental health issue(s) during their lifetime (Falck et al. 2002; Herrero et al. 2008; Vergara-Moragues et al. 2012) . When compared with those who do not have psychiatric comorbidity, cocaine dependent users who have dual diagnoses are more likely to abandon their treatment and report less improvement (Gonzalez-Saiz et al. 2009; King et al. 2014) . While comorbidity between cocaine dependence and mood disorders (Conner et al. 2008; Vergara-Moragues et al. 2012) , alcohol dependence (Ford et al. 2009 ), post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (Saunders et al. 2015) , attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (Daigre et al. 2013) , psychotic disorders (Vergara-Moragues et al. 2012 ) and some personality disorders (Ford et al. 2009 ) have been previously documented, few studies have focused on problem gambling (PG) within these populations.
Problem gambling has been linked to a variety of harmful mental and physical health consequences, as well as a wide variety of problems such as high criminality and homelessness (Blaszczynski and Silove 1996; Shaffer et al. 2004; Stein et al. 2012; Turner et al. 2009 ). These consequences make PG an important public health problem, especially for more vulnerable populations (Gainsbury et al. 2014; Korn and Shaffer 1999; Papineau 2010; Shaffer and Hall 2001) such as individuals with a history of problematic substance use. Indeed, within this vulnerable population, PG is 8 to 24 times the prevalence reported for the general population (Cowlishaw et al. 2014; Cowlishaw and Hakes 2015; Cunningham-Williams et al. 2000; Fernandez-Montalvo et al. 2012; Mathias et al. 2009; Toneatto and Brennan 2002) . The few studies that have focused on cocaine users, all of which were carried out in drug treatment centers, have found prevalence rates of problem gambling among cocaine dependent users ranging from 8 to 15 % (Hall et al. 2000; Steinberg et al. 1992; Toneatto and Brennan 2002) .
This comorbidity between PG and substance dependence has significant repercussions on mental health and living conditions (Cunningham-Williams et al. 2000; Mathias et al. 2009 ). In fact, gamblers who also have another form of dependence (e.g. alcohol or drugs) present a more severe clinical picture when entering treatment and report more mental health problems when compared with those who have one dependence problem (Arseneault et al. 2001; Cunningham-Williams et al. 2000; Feigelman et al. 1998; FernandezMontalvo et al. 2012; Hall et al. 2000; Liu et al. 2009; Mathias et al. 2009; Petry 2007) . Treatment studies concerning cocaine users have found those with gambling problems to be more likely unemployed, to have had a higher prevalence of antisocial personality disorders and more frequent issues with the justice system (Hall et al. 2000; Toneatto and Brennan 2002) . However, these results do not provide much needed information concerning those active cocaine users neither contributed to understand which risk factors are associated with gambling problems.
In an effort to improve our understanding of problem gambling and comorbid mental disorders in a population rarely studied, this exploratory study aims to investigate gambling behaviours, characteristics (socio-demographic) of problem gamblers, and some risk factors (family addiction antecedents, first gambling experience, erroneous perceptions and avoidant coping strategies) in a community-based sample of cocaine users.
A prospective cohort study of mental health disorders, HIV and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections among street-based cocaine users called the COSMO project was carried out in Montréal, Canada (Lévesque et al. 2014) . Analyses were run using data pertaining to gambling behaviors and risk factors (family addiction antecedents, first gambling experience, erroneous perceptions and avoidant coping strategies) collected during one visit over the course of the study. All participants gave explicit consented to take part in the study and ethics approval for the study was provided by the 'Comité d'éthique de la recherche en santé chez l'humain du Centre hospitalier universitaire de Sherbrooke'.
To take part in the cohort study, participants must have used cocaine in the last month, either by smoking crack or by injection. Other eligibility criteria included being at least 14 years old, English-or French-speaking, the ability to provide informed consent and complete an interviewer-administered questionnaire, and having plans to stay in the Montréal area in the following year. Recruitment took place between June 2011 and May 2014. Participants were recruited in community-based programs located in downtown Montréal (Québec) including: day programs for the homeless, various shelters, and needle exchange programs. Recruitment was carried out by study interviewers who visited collaborating community-based programs on a weekly basis except for the smallest ones for which visits were scheduled monthly. Cocaine users willing to participate in the study were invited to the research office located close to the recruitment sites. Participation included baseline and follow-up appointments every three months for 18 months. At each visit, participants were asked to sign a consent form, provide contact information, and complete an interviewer-administered questionnaire. Participants received financial compensation of CAD 30 $ at the end of each interview.
Interviews took approximately 90 and 120 min to complete and covered various themes related to the objectives of the cohort study. To avoid unduly prolonging visits, some questions were completed during only one visit during the study period. For example, questions assessing diagnoses of mental health disorders were completed only at baseline while questions on gambling problems and risk factors were asked two visits later at time 3. All other questions were asked at each visit. Variables typically associated with problematic gambling examined including: socio-demographic characteristics, gambling activities, gambling problems, drug and alcohol consumption, and various risk factors (i.e. family history of addiction, first gambling experience, erroneous perceptions and avoidant coping strategies) (Ferris and Wynne 2001; Welte et al. 2004 ).
These variables included age, gender, ethnicity (born in Canada vs. outside of Canada), level of education (less than high school vs. higher level), homelessness (defined as having lived or slept at least once in a shelter or in any place not intended for housing in the past 3 months), having an unstable income (defined as having a marginal or criminal source of income in the past 3 months).
Participation, in the last 12 months, to eighteen types of gambling activities was examined (Ferris and Wynne 2001) . Severity of gambling problems was evaluated using the 9-item Problem Gambling Severity Index (PGSI), a quantitative sub-section of the Canadian Problem Gambling Index (CPGI) (Ferris and Wynne 2001) . The PGSI consists of 9 items with answers reported on a 4-point Likert scale ('Never'; 'Sometimes'; 'Most of the time'; 'Almost always'). The PGSI demonstrates strong internal validity and reliability, as well as satisfactory temporal reliability (Currie et al. 2013) . The instrument was used to create four categories of players: no risk (score of 0); low risk (score of 1-2); moderate risk (score of 3-7); and problem gambler (score of 8-27).
When designing the CPGI, authors Ferris and Wynne (2001) found a number of variables pertaining to respondents' predispositions and environment that, although peripheral to the core construct of problem gambling, were associated with the development and severity of gambling problems. These variables include: (1) first gambling experience (i.e. 'Do you remember a big win when you first started gambling?'; 'Do you remember a big loss when you first started gambling?'); (2) family addiction antecedents (i.e. 'Has anyone in your family ever had a gambling problem?'; 'Has anyone in your family ever had an alcohol or drug problem?'); (3) erroneous perception (i.e. Chance: 'After losing many times in a row, you are more likely to win'; Strategy: 'You could win more if you used a certain system or strategy'); (4) the use of psychoactive substances while gambling (i.e. 'In the 12 last months, have you used alcohol or drugs while gambling?'; 'In the last 12 months, have you gambled while drunk, or high?'); (5) avoidant coping strategies (i.e. 'In the last 12 months, if something painful happened in your life, did you have the urge to gamble?'; 'In the last 12 months, if something painful happened in your life, did you have the urge to have a drink?'; 'In the last 12 months, if something painful happened in your life did you have the urge to use drugs or medication?').
Problematic alcohol consumption was assessed using the CAGE questionnaire (Mayfield et al. 1974 ), a quick yet sensitive and specific instrument for screening alcohol use disorder (Bernadt et al. 1982) . Two positive responses on this instrument indicate a high probability of problematic alcohol consumption. Severity of cocaine dependence was estimated using the severity of dependence scale (SDS) (Gossop et al. 1995) . The SDS is a five-item tool measuring the intensity of dependence to a drug over the past 3 months. The score ranges between 0 and 15. Cocaine dependence was determined by a SDS score of 4 or higher (Gonzalez-Saiz et al. 2009 ).
Questions regarding past year diagnosis of one or multiple primary mental disorders were taken using two instruments. Psychotic (delusional disorder, brief psychotic disorder and schizophrenic disorder) and affective disorders (major depression, bipolar disorders and dysthymia) were assessed using the World Mental Health Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI) version 2.1 (Kessler and Ustun 2004) . Anxiety disorders (panic disorders, phobic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder) were assessed using the CIDIS developed by Kovess et al. (2001) . Both instruments used are well-validated tools that can be administered by lay interviewers to produce psychiatric diagnoses according to the fourth version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Health Disorders published by the American Psychiatric Association (2010).
Analyses were conducted using data from 424 participants who completed the questionnaire on gambling behaviours and risk factors, representing 70 % of the 605 participants participating in the COSMO project. Respondents had sociodemographic characteristics similar to the total sample of COSMO. Descriptive statistics were employed to characterize the study population, including means or medians with corresponding standard deviation or interquartile ranges (IQR) for continuous variables, and frequency distributions for categorical variables. Based on individual PGSI score, the sample was divided into two categories: at-risk gamblers group (moderate risk and problem gamblers) and non-problem gamblers group (non gamblers and low risk gambling). Pearson's Chi square test and when appropriate Fischer's exact test were used to compare gambling activities between the two groups.
To identify independent correlates of at-risk gambling behaviours, co-variables pertaining to socio-demographics, diagnoses of mental health disorders and risk factors were examined using logistic regression analyses. Covariables with a p value B.05 in univariate analyses were considered in the multivariate linear regression model. The standard method of entry (the enter method) was used, i.e. all independent variables were entered into the equation at the same time. This method is an appropriate analysis when dealing with a small set of predictors and when the researcher does not know which independent variables will create the best prediction equation (Tabachnick and Fidell 2001 

Of the 424 participants, 92.9 % reported smoking crack and 59.6 % reported injecting crack/cocaine. The majority were men (87.2 %) and the mean age was 40.46 years old (SD = 10.70). Most participants reported at least one episode of homelessness in the last three months (65.3 %), were born in Canada (94.8 %), had more than higher level of education (52.1 %) and reported an unstable source of income (70.5 %).
Gambling was common among participants, with 240 individuals (56.6 %) reporting participation in at least one gambling activity in the previous 12 months. According to overall PGSI scores, 162 out of 424 participants (38.2 %) were non-problem gamblers including 135 (31.8 %) who were no risk and 27 (6.4 %) low-risk gamblers, while 78 (18.4 %) were at-risk gamblers including 45 (10.6 %) moderate gamblers and 33 (7.8 %) problem gamblers.
The at-risk (n = 78) and non-problem groups (n = 346) were similar with respect to age (mean age: 42 years old and 41 years old respectively, p = .970), recent episode of homelessness (62.8 and 59.9 %, p = .641), ethnicity (93.6 and 95.1, p = .590), level of education (less than high school, 46.5 and 53.8, p = .244), and reporting an unstable source of income (70.8 and 69.2, p = .782). However, the at-risk group had a slightly greater proportion of male participants than the non-problem group (94.9 and 85.8 %, p = .03).
The three most frequently reported gambling activities were buying lottery tickets (34.2 %), buying instant win or scratch tickets (31.6 %), and playing video lottery terminals (VLTs) in bars (26.0 %) ( Table 1) . No matter the activity, at-risk gamblers were more likely to play than non-problem gamblers. For the at-risk group, the three most frequent gambling activities were playing VLTs in bars (71.8 %), buying lottery ticket (62.8 %), buying instant win or scratch tickets (59.0 %) and the three most gambling activities in which they spent money were slot machines in a casino (M = 476.4), VLTs in bars (M = 267.8), and poker in a casino (M = 265.0).
Results of univariate analyses only yielded significant differences for phobic disorders and alcohol problems (CAGE score) (Table 2) . Specifically, the at-risk group was more likely to have experienced recent phobic disorder and to have a CAGE score equal to or higher than 2. 
Univariate analyses of the risk factors showed statistically significant difference for seven of twelves risk factors (Table 3) . Specifically, at-risk individuals, when compared to nonproblem gamblers, were more likely to have won a large sum of money when they first started gambling, to have lost a large sum of money when they first started gambling, to have consumed alcohol or drugs while gambling, to have gambled under the influence of such substances, to have gambled in reaction to a painful life event, to have consumed alcohol in reaction to a painful life event and to have an erroneous perception of chance.
Multiple linear regression analyses showed that at-risk group, when compared to nonproblem gamblers, were more likely to have lost a large sum when first gambling (OR 6.13; 95 % CI 2.73-13.78), more likely to have gambled in reaction to painful life events (OR 22.79; ) and more likely to think that they have a better chance winning after losing repeatedly (OR 3.10; 95 % CI 1.22-7.91) (Table 4) . However, recent phobic disorder, gender, having won a large sum when fist started gambling, having used alcohol or drugs while gambling, having the urge to have a drink in reaction to a painful event and alcohol problem and were not associated to the at-risk group. 
This is the first study to report on gambling behaviors, mental health problems and risk factors in a sample of community-based crack-cocaine injectors and/or smokers. More than half (57 %) of these heavy cocaine users had taken part in gambling activities in the previous year. While the majority reported no or few gambling problems, a significant proportion (10.6 % moderate risk and 7.8 % problem gamblers) reported problems associated with their gambling. Findings are similar to those observed among people addicted to cocaine who are in treatment (Hall et al. 2000; Toneatto and Brennan 2002) and those reported by consumers of alcohol or other drugs in treatment (Barnes et al. 2015) . Also, results align with previous studies of active consumers of substances such as the homeless (Nower et al. 2014; Shaffer et al. 2002; Sharman et al. 2015) . The present study findings highlight the vulnerability of community-based cocaine users attending homeless and harm reduction programs to gambling problems. Considering nearly one in five cocaine users in this sample suffered from the harmful consequences of gambling activities, it is crucial that the resources they are offered address problems associated with these types of activities (Nower et al. 2014) . Research by Holdsworth and Tiyce (2013) has previously emphasized the secretive nature of problems gambling, stemming perhaps from feelings of shame and from associated stigma, which underscores the importance of engaging in proactive efforts to detect them. Among at-risk gamblers, the most frequently reported gambling activities were VLTs, buying lottery tickets, and buying scratch tickets. Results corroborate previous findings of studies with other vulnerable populations, among whom the problem gamblers reported a preference for VLTs (Antonetti and Horn 2001; Rogers et al. 2005; Shaffer et al. 2002; Talbot 2004) . It has been shown that, due to their structural characteristics (Parke and Griffiths 2006; Harrigan 2008) and their availability (Holtgraves 2009 ), VLTs are often associated to the development of gambling problems (Cox et al. 2005; El-Guebaly et al. 2006) . In addition, it is likely that, for these populations, VLTs and buying lottery and scratch tickets are associated with precarious living conditions and lack of resources . In such a scenario, gambling is used as a subsistence strategy to gain money and improve one's living conditions (Holdsworth and Tiyce 2013; Shaffer et al. 2002) .
Problematic substance use as measured by the SDS for cocaine and the CAGE for alcohol was highly prevalent among study participants, and at-risk gamblers were twice as likely as the non-problem gamblers to have a possible alcohol problem. These concurring addictive disorders point to the complexity of mental health problems among heavy cocaine users which translate clinically into an intricate constellation of needs spanning several other areas of wellbeing such as physical health, and housing (Holdsworth and Tiyce 2013) . According to Holdsworth and Tiyce (2013) , these compounded needs have an amplifying and accumulating outcome that, over time, generates new problems and barriers to the resolution of addictive problems. More research is needed, particularly using longitudinal study design, to better understand the overlapping origins of these problems as well as better intervention approaches. Although different studies of clinical samples (Fernandez-Montalvo et al. 2012; Mathias et al. 2009; Petry 2005) and in the general population (El-Guebaly et al. 2006; Lorains et al. 2011 for a review) have highlighted higher prevalence of anxiety disorders and depression among problem gamblers, these findings were only partially supported by the present study. In fact, with the exception of phobic disorders, the at-risk group did not differ from non-problem gamblers. A higher prevalence of phobic disorder has also been observed in other at-risk populations such as intravenous drug users (Roy et al. 2015) . Furthermore, the fact that more than half gamblers presented an anxiety disorder in the past 12 months, suggests that there may be the underlying mechanism linking anxiety disorders and PG (Desai and Potenza 2008; Kessler et al. 2008; Petry et al. 2005) . Impulsivity and difficulty making decisions could also be integral to the mechanisms of these two issues (Gonzales-Ortega et al. 2013; Ochoa et al. 2013) . This high comorbidity with mental health problems underlines the necessity of thoroughly assessing the full range of mental health problems whenever someone is seeking help for recovery (Lorains et al. 2011) .
In regard to risk factors associated with gambling problems, remembering a large win from when an individual began gambling has been previously associated with the development gambling problems in different studies (Turner et al. 2006 (Turner et al. , 2008 . Still, few studies have underlined the importance of remembering a large loss in one's first gambling experience even though it is likely that such a distressing event, in a population already struggling with financial problems, could rapidly precipitate chasing behavior. Thus, the financial difficulties associated with substance consumption and gambling losses could add to overall stress, potentiating the anxiety disorders and the gambling problems concurrently. Furthermore, as observed in previous studies (Joukhador et al. 2003; Xian et al. 2014) , erroneous beliefs pertaining to chance also contributed here to the identification of gambling problems. However, a more extensive evaluation of erroneous beliefs using a validated measurement instrument like the Gamblers's Beliefs Questionnaire (Steenbergh et al. 2002) would help to better understand the importance of this risk factor in the development of gambling problems within this vulnerable group.
Finally, one interesting finding in this study pertains to the variables (mental health, risk factors, socio-demographic) strongly associated with the at-risk group. In fact, the final model indicated that most of the factors that were found to be associated with at-risk group gamblers are emotional components linked to anxiety or to its management. More specifically, having lost a large sum when an individual had first started gambling, having the urge to gamble in reaction to a painful event and having erroneous beliefs about chance are all determinants of the at-risk group. This finding is consistent with Jacobs' General Theory of Addictions (Jacobs 1986) and suggests that problematic gamblers use gambling as a maladaptive coping strategy (Gupta and Derevensky 1998) . It is therefore possible, for cocaine users, that gambling is used as a way to escape from negative emotional state or distract oneself from distressing thoughts or distressing living conditions (Baker et al. 2004; Kaiser et al. 2012; Koob 2013; Rockloff et al. 2011; Thomas et al. 2009; Wood and Griffiths 2007) .
This study has several limitations to be considered including the self-recruitment process, which may have affected the representativeness of the sample. Generalizability of our findings to other populations might be difficult since the study sample was composed of regular cocaine users who either smoked or injected cocaine. They were recruited mainly in community-based programs located in downtown Montréal (i.e. homeless day programs, shelters, and needle exchange programs). Study participants might thus not be representative of all regular cocaine users such as those who do not access these services and those who do not smoke or inject cocaine. Also, data collection by interview-administered questionnaires may have led to the minimization of certain stigmatized behaviors. Recall bias may have occurred because of the broad period of time covered by the questions. Finally, the cross-sectional design could not ascertain causality. A longitudinal follow-up of this cohort will help to better understand the gambling trajectories of cocaine users.
Despite these limitations, these results underline the presence of a significant proportion of smoked or injected cocaine users exhibiting gambling problems alongside other mental health problems, particularly anxiety problems. These results suggest that gambling may be a strategy to cope with difficult life situations and underline the importance of considering the full range of mental health problems when developing prevention or treatment interventions targeting cocaine users. A initial approach to be considered could be asking community workers to integrate questions on gambling activities as a way to show openness to discuss this topic. Furthermore, cocaine users need integrated plans of intervention to address gambling, drug, alcohol and mental health problems at the same time. In order to do that, it is important that homeless and harm reduction resources have suitable and up to date knowledge of the gambling services offered in their area. Finally, future longitudinal studies need to be conducted in order to better understand the relationship between gambling behaviours of cocaine users and the development other at-risk behaviours like injection of substance. They should also expand research to explore the temporal development between substance use disorders, gambling and mental health problems.
institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
A 25-year-old construction worker presented to the emergency department (ED) after the accidental fall of a metal bar on his neck. In the field, he was appropriately managed with a cervical collar for possible spine injury. On arrival at the ED, he was fully conscious with severe neck pain, hypotensive 80/50 mmHg and bradycardiac 48 beats/min. Physical examination revealed a flaccid paralysis and sensory loss in all four extremities. A chest X-ray study was unremarkable (Fig. 1, panel a) . Two hours later, after examination revealed absent air entry over the right lung base, a repeat X-ray study showed an elevated right hemidiaphragm and an ipsilateral mediastinal shift ( Fig. 1 panel b ). Computed tomography (CT scan) of the neck showed a comminuted, posteriorly displaced fracture of the third cervical vertebrae (Fig. 1 , panel c and d). In view of the established quadriplegia and neurogenic shock, this X-ray finding is suggestive of unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. The delayed onset of diaphragmatic paralysis probably coincides with the evolving post-traumatic spinal cord edema. A few hours later, he developed respiratory distress with evident abdominal wall retraction during inspiration and protrusion during expiration in addition to hypoxia, hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis on blood gas analysis. The trachea was intubated and mechanical ventilation was started. This worsening respiratory status was concerning for the progression into bilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. Throughout the ICU course, his neurological status failed to improve requiring continued mechanical ventilation and subsequent tracheostomy. He was transferred to a subacute rehabilitation facility for further care.
The diagnosis of diaphragmatic paralysis is suggested clinically by the presence of abdominal wall retraction during inspiration and protrusion during expiration. Whereas unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is usually well tolerated in the absence of underlying lung pathology, bilateral paralysis requires long-term ventilatory support. In contrast to bilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, a chest X-ray study is more specific for diagnosing a unilateral paralysis. Fluoroscopy confirms the diagnosis when paradoxical inspiratory elevation of the paralyzed hemidiaphragm is evident. 
Stroke and seizures-induced neurodegeneration share a number of biological processes, including increased neuronal activity, neuronal plasticity, inflammation, and apoptosis [1, 2] . Separation of effects of these processes on gene expression, identification of participating transcription factors, and comparison of transcriptional regulation between the two pathological conditions remain a challenging task. Global gene expression following stroke and seizures were compared before at a single time-point [3] , but no comparison of time-series gene profiling datasets from the two conditions was reported to date.
Alter et al. first introduced a concept that orthogonal components (eigensystems) resulting from the singular value decomposition (SVD) of time-series gene expression dataset [4, 5] may help to separate concurrent effects of different processes and regulators on gene expression. These authors proposed that an eigen array may reflect a genome-wide input from a particular regulator, with the corresponding eigen gene reflecting this regulator's activity across the samples (arrays). For an illustration of the SVD nomenclature, when applied to gene expression -see Additional file 1.
A number of recent studies concentrated on usefulness of eigengenes [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] , whereas the properties and interpretation of eigenarrays remained relatively less explored. We previously suggested that conservation of eigenarrays between related biological systems may identify eigensystems of biological origin [11] . In the same work, utilizing a comparative SVD approach we identified an eigensystem conserved between hippocampal development and differentiation of hippocampal neurons in vitro. Analysis of cis-regulation of that eigensystem revealed that it reflected exit of neural precursors from the cell cycle and beginning of neuronal differentiation, regulated by transcription factors E2f1 and Nr2f1 [12] .
Bayesian Networks (BN) learning approach is a wellestablished method of modelling gene regulation and interactions between gene regulatory motifs, starting from gene expression data [13] or gene expression and genomic sequence data [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] . The use of linear regression in analysis of gene cis-regulation is grounded in the linear response model of gene regulation [21, 22] .
Here, we report a time-series dataset from gene expression profiling in the rat MCAO model of stroke, and compare these data to the published time-series dataset from the kainate-induced seizures model [23] . By comparative SVD approach, followed by Bayesian network analysis of cis-regulation, we identified two conserved eigensystems separating the effects of different well-defined biological processes on gene expression and regulated by distinct sets of transcription factor binding sites. The results obtained on either dataset were validated on the other.

We compared two time-series gene expression datasets from experimental rat models of stroke and epilepsy, which were the transient middle-cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and the kainate-induced seizures, respectively. The MCAO dataset was generated in our laboratory and probed gene expression in the cortex of the ischemic hemisphere at four time-points (6, 12, 24, 48 h ) following a 90 minutes occlusion of the right middle-cerebral artery in adult anesthetized rats, and included sham-operated animals as controls. The kainate dataset, published by Koh and co-workers [23] probed gene expression in the hippocampus of adult rats at five time-points (1, 6, 24, 72, 240 h) following the injection of kainate -a neurotransmitter analogue inducing seizures, which can last for several hours, followed by a seizure-free latent period.
As immobilization of a conscious animal and injection alters gene expression in the brain, this dataset included a control time-series following the injection of saline.
The overall design of our study is illustrated in Figure  1 . We transform each dataset (MCAO, kainate) separately by SVD ( Figure 1A ) and identify eigenarrays conserved between the two systems ( Figure 1B ). This is followed by analysis of biological function using Gene Ontology (GO), and gene cis-regulation using Bayesian networks (BN) and our TRAM database of putative regulatory regions and motifs. These analyses are performed separately for either dataset and then the results for the corresponding eigensystems are compared (GO terms) or statistically cross-validated (BN results) on the other dataset. The cross-validation between the stroke and seizures data is not contradictory with the goal of gaining information by comparison of the two, because the two experimental models can be assumed -on biological grounds -to share some, but not all, regulatory mechanisms. Note that features specific for one model can be identified, as for each model we separately account for the multiplicity of testing. The eigenarrays resulting from the SVD of either dataset were compared by correlation analysis performed for the genes common between the two datasets. (C) For the emerging conserved eigensystems 2 and 3, separately for all the genes in either dataset, we studied their functional Gene Ontology (GO) associations and employed Bayesian Networks (BN) to study their cis-regulation. The results obtained on one dataset were then compared (GO) or statistically tested (BN) on the other.
The global temporal changes in gene expression following MCAO in the stroke model are dominated by the top three eigensystems (Figure 2A ). The eigengene of the first eigensystem in the MCAO dataset (M1, "M" to indicate MCAO) is constant in time (data not shown) in the log-expression space and thus represents the average level of expression across all the conditions. The second eigengene (M2) represents an increased expression, as compared to control value, at 12-48 h following MCAO, with a peak at 12 h ( Figure 2B ). The third eigengene (M3) represents a complex pattern with an increase in gene expression at 12 h followed by down-regulation of expression at 24 h and further drop at 48 h ( Figure 2C ). Notably, the three top eigengenes indicate no changes in gene expression at 6 h after MCAO, which is in agreement with our earlier PCR results showing no changes in mRNA levels of a smaller number of genes [24] .
The global temporal pattern of gene expression following kainate-induced seizures in adult rats is dominated by the top three eigensystems ( Figure 2D ), of which the first again represents the magnitude (data not shown). The second eigengene (A2), represents an increased expression following the injection of kainate; starting at 1 h, largest at 6 and 24 h, returning to the baseline level at 72 and 240 h; and no change at any time-point after the injection of saline ( Figure 2E ). The third eigengene (A3) represents an increased expression at 1 and 6 h after the injection of kainite; followed by strong decrease in expression at 24 h, continuing, but less pronounced, also at the 72 and 240 h ( Figure 2F ).
Despite their overall similarity, the corresponding eigengenes are distinct between the two experimental models. In particular, eigengenes M2 and M3 show no change in expression at 6 h following the MCAO, in contrast to eigengenes A2 and A3, showing an increase at 6 h following the injection of kainate.
The kainate datasets comprised of expression profiles for 2786 genes (distinct Ensembl gene_stable_id) that significantly changed expression and the stroke dataset consisted of 2392 such genes, with 737 genes common between the two datasets. The correlation analysis revealed that the top three eigenarrays (compared for the common genes) were highly correlated ( Figure  2G ). The correlations between the respective first, second, and third eigenarrays were 0.87, 0.84, and 0.63, respectively. Note that the correspondence between the three conserved eigenarrays was one-to-one. Given the length (737) of the correlated vectors, these correlations are highly significant (p-values: 10 -229 , 10 -197 , 10 -83 , respectively, assuming independence of genes). This indicates that the top three eigenarrays are highly conserved between the two datasets. Figure 2H -I shows directly genes' loadings of the respective second (H) or third (I) eigensystem in the two datasets, sorted on their average loading in both datasets. This sorting of the genes aids visualization of the eigenarrays conservation, but is not in any way a reason for it, as the correlations shown in Figure 2G were computed before the sorting (and would not be affected by it, anyway). The tangent-like shape of the plots reflects the bell shape of the distributions of genes' loadings of eigensystems 2 and 3.
Further, we focus on eigensystems 2 and 3 characterized by conservation of their eigenarrays occurring despite differences between the corresponding eigengenes ( Figure 2B vs. E, C vs. F). This suggests that the two eigensystems reflect regulatory inputs operating in both systems, but with different kinetics and relative strengths.
A universal reason underlying co-regulation of genes is participation of their products in a common biological process. To assess if the contribution of the eigensystems 2 and 3 to the gene expression profiles is associated with biological functions, we analyzed the Gene Ontology "biological process" annotations of all genes in either dataset, ranked on the loadings of the respective eigensystems 2-3.
In both experimental models, the positive loading of the second eigensystem was significantly associated with overlapping GO terms describing the inflammatory response to the brain injury ( Figure 3A, B) . Additionally, in the MCAO system the positive loading of eigensystem M2 was also significantly associated with GO terms describing programmed cell death (apoptosis).
In the kainate system, the positive loading of eigensystem A3 was highly significantly associated with several overlapping GO terms describing neuronal activity, such as: synaptic transmission, transmission of the nerve impulse ( Figure 3C ). No such association was detected for third eigensystem (M3) from the SVD on the MCAO dataset, following its initial filtering (ANOVA p-value < 0.05). However, when the GO analysis was repeated for the third eigenarray in the SVD result on the MCAO dataset filtered at ANOVA p-value < 0.5 and thus containing more genes, there was a clear association between the loadings of the third eigensystem and GO terms describing neuronal activity ( Figure 3D ). Loosening of the p-value threshold was possible, because the top three eigensystems were extremely robust to the change of the p-value threshold, with eigenarrays correlations > 0.999 between vectors of length 2786 for the change of the threshold from 0.05 to 0.5 (data not shown). Comparison of the singular values ( Figure 2A vs. 2D) indicates that the relative contribution of the conserved third eigensystem (reflecting neuronal activity) was higher in the kainate system, while the relative contribution of the conserved second eigensystem (reflecting inflammation and/or apoptosis) was higher in the stroke.
Conservation of eigenarrays suggests that they reflect regulatory mechanisms, possibly operating at the level of transcription regulation. To identify such mechanisms, we employed Bayesian networks, previously successfully applied to modelling transcriptional regulation [14, 15, [17] [18] [19] [20] . We follow the above approaches in general, but several essentials are specific to our methodology:
• Regulation of gene expression is analysed separately for each conserved eigensystem. In the subspace of a given eigensystem gene expression is binarized into up-and down-regulation, according to the sign of its loading. (Figure 4B , D).
• Our combinatorial model of cis-regulation takes into account fragmentation of metazoan cis-regulatory regions into multiple conserved non-coding sequences (CNSs) [25, 26] , and distinguishes between co-occurrence of several TF-binding motifs in the Figure 3 Functional Gene Ontology annotations associated with the conserved eigensystems (A-D) Association of loadings of the conserved eigensystems with the functional annotations from the GO "biological process" ontology were analyzed by Wilcoxon sign rank test using RankGOstat [55] . Twenty GO terms most associated with a given eigensystem, and their association FDR q-values are shown as bar plots. For the plots the q-values were log10-transformed and multiplied by +1 or -1, to reflect association with the positive or negative loadings of a particular eigensystem. GO terms with overlapping meanings (identified by human inspection) are indicated by the same colour of the bars, with red marking terms related to "synaptic transmission", blue marking terms similar to "inflammatory response", and black marking terms describing cell death/apoptosis.
same CNS and their co-occurrence in the same gene ( Figure 4A , C). Following previous work [27, 28] , we term every possible subset of the motifs present in the same CNS a composite motif.
• Regulatory mechanism is predicted by learning Bayesian networks with an exact algorithm. Computations are performed by double application of the BNFinder program [29] . The first run selects the most promising composite motifs (possibly single motifs), while the second run selects the sets of such composite motifs that best predict the sign of the loading the chosen eigensystem ( Figure 4E , F).
Four BN analyses were performed, separately for each conserved eigensystem in either experimental model (M2, A2, M3, A3). BN scores were directly converted to q-values -the false discovery rate [30] analogue of p-values, by comparing each feature's score on the Figure 4 Bayesian network model of fragmented cis-regulatory regions (A, C) Sequence preprocessing consists of extracting instances of composite motifs i.e. sets of (up to three motifs) in the same conserved non-coding sequence (CNS), from the flanks of transcription start sites of all human-rat orthologous genes. (B, D) Expression data preprocessing consists of SVD, followed by discretization of expression into up-and down-regulation in the subspace of a particular conserved eigensystem -based on the sign of its loading. (C, D) Composite motifs and expression data are combined in one dataset, in which the data records correspond to genes. (E) This dataset becomes an input for our Bayesian networks (BN) learning algorithm, which identifies sets of composite motifs most associated with the sign of loadings of a given eigensystem. (F) The final output consists of a ranking of such sets, with conditional probability distributions representing their impact on a given eigensystem. BN learning was performed independently for each of the eigensystems: A2, A3, M2, M3; on the data for all the genes in the respective dataset. Eigensystem A3 is shown as an example.
original data to the distribution of scores from 1000 BN analyses on permuted data -each following an independent random permutation and assignment of expression values to the genes' putative cis-regulatory regions. The conservation of the two eigensystems between the stroke allowed for selection of best features on one dataset (we choose up to ten features with training q-values < 0.05) and then testing them on the other -containing the data for largely different genes. The training and testing were performed for the conserved second ( Figure 5A , B) and third eigensystem ( Figure 5C , D) in both directions. During the test we used the same q-values as during the training, i.e. they were corrected for all the hypotheses ever looked at on the test dataset. We note that this is a very stringent correction, as only up to 20 hypotheses Figure 5 BN analysis of cis-regulation for the conserved eigensystems. The four tables (A-D) present the results of BN analysis of cisregulation for the conserved second and third eigensystems from either dataset, followed by testing of highest-ranking features on the corresponding eigensystem from the other dataset. In each panel, the column Feature lists up to 10 nonempty sets of composite motifs with highest BN score and q-value < 0.05 on the indicated training dataset. Note that single motifs are included in the set of composite motifs. BN score of a composite motif set is the ratio of its posterior probability to the posterior probability of the empty set. The corresponding q-value derives from the permutational test. The shaded columns give the values of BN score and the corresponding q-value for the same feature computed on the other (test) dataset. Red color marks the cells with the test q-values < 0.05 for the features that also had training q-value < 0.05 and the descriptions of such features are given in bold. The q-values take into account the multiplicity of testing for each dataset separately, so it is possible to identify the features significant for one dataset only. (E, F) The conditional probability tables for the pairs of motifs: {AP1F, SATB} (E) and {EGRF, LHXF} (F).
were considered for each eigensystem during the test stage (up to ten for either direction of the comparison).
Antagonistic effects of motifs binding AP1 and SATB on gene expression following the stroke BN search identified just one feature, namely the motif AP1F -a family of binding sites for the transcription factor AP1 (Additional file 2) as the feature significantly (q-value < 0.05) associated with the positive sign of eigensystem A2 in the kainate model ( Figure 5A , columns: "Training: Kainate"). Notably, this feature was significantly associated with the corresponding eigensystem M2, when tested on the dataset from the MCAO model ( Figure 5A , column Test: MCAO). The choice of the MCAO data as the training dataset resulted in identification of 7 significant features, of which the second was again AP1F, and only this feature was significant also in the cross-system test on the kainate dataset ( Figure 5B , columns "Test: kainate"). All remaining features identified as significant (q-value < 0.05) on the training datasets included AP1F as one motif, and two of them were pairs of AP1F with another motif in the same gene. Of the features significant in the MCAO system, particularly interesting is the pair {AP1F, SATB} -a set of two motifs co-occurring in the same gene, which have antagonistic effects on expression in the subspace of eigensystem M2. The presence of motif AP1F in the absence of SATB in the same gene was associated with the positive sign of M2 loading, while the presence of SATB in the absence of AP1F was associated with the negative M2 loading ( Figure 5E ).
Identification of known and new regulators/targets for the eigensystem reflecting synaptic activity BN search identified a number of features as highly significantly (q-value < 0.001) associated with the sign of M3 loading during the training on the kainate dataset. The ten highest-ranking features, ranked on their BN score were tested on the MCAO dataset ( Figure 5C ). Of the top ten features significant on the kainate dataset, four were also significant on the MCAO dataset. All of these features, marked in bold in Figure 5C , were pairs of motifs co-occurring in the same gene. All these pairs contained LHXF as one motif, with EGRF, AHRR, ZF5F or ZBPF as the other motif. The highest-ranking featurethe pair EGRF and LHXF in the same gene, but neither motif of its own, was 79% specific for the positive sign of eigensystem 3 ( Figure 5F ). When the training was performed on the MCAO dataset, several features significantly (q-value < 0.001) associated with the sign of M3 were identified ( Figure 5D ). Importantly, out of the top ten features identified on the stroke dataset, nine were also significantly associated with the same sign of M3 on the kainate dataset. The features significant in the cross-system test were either single motifs (AP1R, PARF, CREB, AHRR) or pairs of motifs in the same gene. All these pairs contained AP1R as one motif, with PARF, AHRR, ZF5F, EGRF, E4FF as the other motif. Three motifs, namely EGRF, ZF5F, AHRR were common between the top ten features identified during training on the kainate and the MCAO datasets.
We wanted to check if a model taking into account motif multiplicity would allow a more precise prediction of the value of expression. Therefore, we applied a linear regression analysis to the motifs identified by BN analysis as significant in both systems, and additionally the motif SATB significant in the MCAO system only. For the reasons detailed in the Materials and methods, we always performed a weighted linear regression, with the average loadings in groups of genes with the same motif count as the response variable, and the weights set to the numbers of genes in each group, as suggested by Faraway [31] .
The regression analyses were performed separately for the MCAO and the kainate datasets. The linear regression confirmed that the AP1F and SATB motifs had antagonistic effects on expression in the subspace of eigensystem M2 (Figure 6A-C) . The count of motif SATB per gene had a clear linear (R 2 = 0.91) and highly significant (p = 1.6 × 10 -5 ) effect on the group-average expression in the subspace of eigensystem M2 ( Figure  6A ). In agreement with the earlier BN result, the count SATB had no effect on loading of eigensystem A2 (data not shown). The inhibitory effect of SATB on gene expression in the MCAO system was specific for eigensystem M2, with no inhibition of expression in the subspace of any other eigensystem (data not shown).
The count of motif AP1F had a significant, positive and possibly linear effect on the average expression in a subspace of the second eigensystem, both in the MCAO (p = 0.0019, R 2 = 0.64) and in the kainate dataset ( Figure 6B , p = 0.00059, R 2 = 0.71). Remarkably, when the effect of AP1F count on M2 loading was analyzed separately for the genes with and without motif SATB, the effect became more apparent for the genes without motif SATB ( Figure 6C , p = 0.00044, R 2 = 0.76), while the effect was nullified for the genes with the motif SATB ( Figure 6D) .
The linear regression revealed that the count of motif CREB had a highly significant and approximately linear effect on the average expression in a subspace of the third eigensystem in the kainate ( Figure 7A eigensystem, in particular in the MCAO model, where it had no effect on the loadings of the eigensystem M2 (data not shown).
The effects of motif multiplicity on gene expression prompted us to investigate by the linear regression if a related variable -the count of conserved non-coding sequences (CNSs) per gene had an effect on gene expression. That we found was true in both experimental models (Figure 7E, F) . Similarly to the effect of CREB count, the effect of CNS count was highly specific for the third eigensystem (data not shown). However, when the effect of CNS count was analyzed in a bivariate linear regression model, together with that of CREB, the effect of the CNS was completely (MCAO) or nearly completely (kainate) dependent on the CNSs' content of Creb-binding motifs ( Figure 7E, F) .
Here, we demonstrated that eigensystems conserved between stroke and seizures separate effects of inflammation/apoptosis and synaptic activity on gene expression. The contribution of the eigensystem 3 reflecting synaptic activity was relatively greater (compared to eigensystem 2) in the seizures model, in agreement with higher electrical activity of neurons. Remarkably, our analysis of cis-regulation revealed that the these two functionally well-interpretable eigensystems were regulated by distinct sets of transcription factors, with AP1 and SATB regulating the eigensystem reflecting inflammation/apoptosis, and numerous TFs including Creb and Egr regulating the eigensystem reflecting neuronal synaptic activity.
Activation of transcription factor AP1 following the kainate-induced seizures and cerebral ischemia is well established [32, 33] . In particular, Timp1 was shown to be the target of AP1 following kainate-induced seizures [34] . The mRNA profiles of Timp1 in both systems ( Figure 6E, F) are highly similar to the profiles of the respective second eigengenes, which is compatible with our identification of AP1 as the key regulator of this eigensystem. It is well established that activation of Mapk8-Jun/AP1 signalling pathway has a predominantly pro-apoptotic effect in neurons [35] , however, only few Mapk8-AP1 targets genes have been identified. Therefore, demonstrating the importance of the number of AP1-binding motifs per gene and the simultaneous absence of SATB motif for gene activation contributes to identification of AP1 target genes.
We report novel and exciting finding that presence of the motif binding Satb1 prevents -in a motif number dependent manner -transcriptional activation in the stroke system. Satb1, which is the best characterized MAR-binding protein, has recently emerged as a key factor integrating higher-order chromatin architecture and gene regulation -reviewed in [36] . Depending on cell type and locus, its effect on chromatin looping may either activate transcription, as described for Th2 interleukin gene cluster [37] , or inhibit transcription, as for the MHC class 1 locus [38] and tentatively for our eigensystem M2. A hypothetical mechanism, in which genes in longer chromatin loops, or at the peaks of the loops, are more accessible to binding or activation by AP1, is depicted in Figure 6G . Proteolytic degradation of Satb1 occurs during early phases of apoptosis [39] [40] [41] . In the current work, the effect of SATB motif on expression was limited to the MCAO eigensystem 2 associated with the apoptosis.
Our analysis of cis-regulation of conserved eigensystem 3 -reflecting neuronal (synaptic) activity correctly predicted the known role of Creb/Atf/E4f1 and Egr as key regulators of neuronal activity regulated genes, important for neuronal plasticity and memory -for review, see [42, 43] . CREB motif binds transcription factors of the Creb family [43] [44] [45] , while E4FF motif binds transcription factors from the Atf family. EGRF binds transcription factors of the Egr family [46, 47] . PARF binds PAR/bZIP family of TFs (Dbp, Hlf, Tef, and Vbp1). The motifs binding Creb, Atf and Vbp1 are similar (Additional file 2) and these transcription factors have been shown to bind to overlapping sites [48] . A loss of the PAR/bZIP transcription factors results in seizures [49] . Using classical experimental methods, about a hundred Creb target genes have been identified, of which about half encodes neuronspecific proteins -reviewed by Lonze & Ginty [44] . A genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation study by Impey et al. identified Creb binding genes in the neuron-like differentiating rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells [50] . When this set of genes was analyzed in our datasets, we found a clear association between Crebbinding to the gene and the positive loading of the third eigensystem ( Figure 7D) . Thus, the experimental data of Impey and co-authors support our in silico results, demonstrating an importance of the presence of CREB motif for gene up-regulation in the subspace of eigensystem reflecting neuronal activity.
Much experimental evidence supports an important role of Egr transcription factors in brain function. Transcription factors from the Egr family are induced in the rat hippocampus following kainate-induced seizures with kinetics closely resembling eigengene A3 (data not shown) and regulate expression of Arc [51] , a gene important for neuronal plasticity and memory formation [52] . Transcriptional activation of Egrs was also demonstrated following brain ischemia -reviewed in [47] . In addition to Creb and Egr, our BN analysis identified several novel tentative transcriptional regulators of the eigensystem reflecting synaptic activity ( Figure 5 and Additional file 2).
We demonstrate linear effects of the counts of the motifs SATB and CREB on log-expression in subspaces of the respective regulated eigensystems following the MCAO. These findings are in agreement with the predictions of the linear response model of gene regulation [21] . Moreover -because this model is valid only for TFs operating within the same cell -the observed agreement is revealing of the underlying biology ( Figure 7F) . First, it suggests that Satb and Creb operate within the same cells, namely neurons. This prediction is in agreement with our previous experimental data that majority of the cells undergoing apoptosis in the MCAO system are neurons [24] . Second, our results suggest that neuronal apoptosis is triggered by inflammation occurring in other cell types, namely microglia and astrocytes. This could explain why effects of inflammation and apoptosis are reflected by the same eigensystem, uncorrelated to the one reflecting effects of synaptic transmission.
The observed linear effect of CNSs' count per gene on log-transformed gene expression, depending on their content of CREB, is very interesting in the context of high specificity of this effect (data not shown) for the conserved eigensystem reflecting neuronal synaptic activity. Lee et al. [53] reported relatively greater cumulative length of CNSs in the upstream regions of genes involved in development, cell communication, neural functions and signaling processes, and suggested that this may reflect their greater regulatory complexity. We suggest, as another possibility, that neuronal genes need more CNSs (putative enhancers) to accommodate CREB motifs needed for responsiveness to rapidly changing synaptic activity.
Our results, demonstrating conservation of eigenarrays of temporal log-expression profiles, between hippocampus following seizures and cortex following the stroke, corroborate and extend recent findings of Oldham et al. [54] . These authors applied SVD to clusters ('modules' in their terminology) of expression profiles identified separately for several brain regions, and demonstrated conservation of 'module membership' between the corresponding clusters from different regions. As the 'module membership' is closely related to the first eigenarray of each cluster, their findings imply conservation of the first eigenarrays between the corresponding clusters. Our results demonstrate conservation of eigenarrays that occurs genome-wide for three eigensystems, two of which reflect distinct well-defined biological processes and are regulated via different sets of transcription factor binding sites.
Eigensystems conserved between stroke and seizures separate effects of different biological processes on gene expression, exerted via distinct sets of transcription factor binding motifs. Motif recognized by the nuclear matrix attachment region-binding protein Satb1 blocks AP1-driven transcriptional activation. The effects of motifs binding Creb and Satb1 on gene expression conform to the assumptions of the linear response model of gene regulation.
Gene expression profiling in the MCAO system Animals and surgical procedures
The experimental protocol was approved by the Local Animal Care and Use Committee and conforms to the national guidelines for the care and use of animals in research. 3-months old male Wistar rats weighing 270-320 g were used.
The MCAO (a middle cerebral artery occlusion) surgeries were performed under general halothane anaesthesia. Transient MCAO was induced with the intraluminal filament method (3-0 nylon monofilament suture) as described before [24] . A filament was withdrawn after 90 min. of MCAO to allow reperfusion, the incision was closed and anaesthesia discontinued. Sham-operated animals were subjected to the similar surgery with exception of MCA occlusion.
At various times after reperfusion, sham-operated and MCAO subjected rats were anesthetized with an overdose of pentobarbital and decapitated. Brains were rapidly removed, bisected at the midline and dorsolateral fragments of cerebral cortex containing MCA territory was dissected from the ipsilateral to occlusion (right) and contralateral (left) hemisphere. Total RNA was extracted from the samples using a phenol-guanidine thiocyanatebased method (TRI REAGENT, Sigma, Germany) and cleaned using RNeasy Total RNA kit (Qiagen, Germany) according to the manufacturer's recommendations followed by DNAse treatment. The amount and quality of the RNA was determined by spectrophotometry and capillary electrophoresis. The microarray hybridizations were conducted in the microarray facility of the Institute of Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center, Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland. Each time-point (6, 12, 24, 48 h ) and sham-operated (sh) group consisted three animals per group; RNAs from each individual were separately labelled and analyzed by microarray hybridization, for a total of 15 microarray hybridizations. The experiment was loaded to ArrayExpress (accession E-MEXP-2222).
The published dataset of Wilson et al. [23] from expression profiling in the hippocampus of adult rats with Affymetrix RG-U34A chip was downloaded from the NIH Neuroscience Microarray Consortium http://arrayconsortium.tgen.org/, projects: Koh-7K08NS002068-05-3, Koh-2K08NS002068-04. These datasets probed gene expression in the hippocampus of adult (P30) and young (P15) rats at 5 time-points (1, 6, 24, 72, 240 h) following the intraperitoneal injection of kainate (treatment) or saline (control). Only animals with nearly continuous seizures for more than half an hour were included in that study. Age-specific doses of kainate (3 mg/kg at P15, and 10 mg/kg at P30) were used that had been determined previously to result in < 25% mortality while inducing seizures in >60% of the animals. At the time of RNA isolation the animal could be seizing or during the latent period. Each condition was probed by three microarray hybridizations. The kainate data from both projects were pre-processed together, and the MAS5 detection calls for both ages were used together for the P/A/M filtering described below. Subsequently, the Mas5 signal data only from the adult rats (10 conditions) were used in the current work.
The CEL files from the MCAO experiment and separately the CEL files from the kainate experiment (from the young and adult rats together) were pre-processed with the MAS 5.0 algorithm as implemented in the affy R Bioconductor package (Irizarry et al. 2002) . Only the profiles of the probesets detected (MAS 5 call: Present or Marginal) in all hybridizations for at least one condition in a given experiment were used. The profiles from either experiment identified by probe set identifiers were mapped to the Ensembl 39 gene_stable_ids. Separately for either dataset, we computed a single average MAS5 signal profile for each gene_stable_id, resulting in gene expression matrices: (11012 × 15) for the MCAO system, and (3908 × 30) for the Adult rats from the kainate system. These data matrices were log2 transformed and analyzed separately by ANOVA. For further analysis from either dataset we selected the genes with the respective ANOVA p-value < 0.05. The average log2 expression profiles of these genes over the three biological replicates were computed, resulting in matrices: M (2786 × 5) for the MCAO system, and A (2392 × 10) for the kainate system.
The SVD analysis and the comparison of eigenarrays between two datasets were performed essentially as previously described [11] . Briefly, SVD was performed separately on matrices M, A, resulting in matrices u M (2786 × 5), m genes common between these two datasets. This resulted in matrices u MA and u AM . We calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient r between each pair of columns of u MA and u AM . The two-sided p-values corresponding to these correlations were obtained from the Student t distribution, with the t statistics calculated with the formula t = r[d /(1-r
2 )] 1/2 , where d is the number of the degrees of freedom.
GO terms associated with loadings of conserved eigensystems were identified, separately for either dataset, using RankGOstat [55] , available at http://gostat.wehi. edu.au/. The lists of gene symbols (Ensembl display_id), together with loadings of a particular eigensystem for a given (ANOVA-filtered) dataset were used as the input files. Default options (Wilcoxon Signed Rank test, Benjamini False Discovery Rate correction for multiple testing) were used, with the RGD database chosen as the source of GO annotations and the analysis was restricted to the "biological process" ontology. The result files were saved, parsed and converted to graphics using local scripts.
We used conserved non-coding sequences (CNSs) between human and rat as putative regulatory regions. For each human-rat orthologous gene pair (ortholog_one2one and apparent_ortholog_one2one) in Ensembl release 39, a flank of 20 kilobase (kb) of the genomic sequence from -10 kb to + 10 kb from the transcription start site were aligned using the AVID global alignment algorithm [25] . Sequence windows at least 100 base-pairs (bp) long with ≥ 75% identity were selected as putative regulatory regions. This resulted in the identification of 49425 CNSs for 9099 orthologous gene pairs in the human and rat genomes. A large proportion of similarly identified human-rodent CNSs was shown experimentally to function as enhancers [26] . The input genomic sequence and annotation data, and the results of this analysis were stored in a relational database named TRAM (Transcription regulatory Regions And Motifs), built on the open MySQL platform. The average length of the CNSs was 190 +/-SD 136 bp.
Instances of transcription factor binding motifs were predicted for all the vertebrate nucleotide distribution matrices of the Matrix Family Library version 6.2 using the program MatInspector [56] (Genomatix). Default thresholds, optimized for each motif as described in [57] were used. Search was performed for all CNSs in the TRAM database, separately for the human and the rat sequence, resulting in identification of 1679998 vertebrate motif instances in the human and 1601216 in the rat. The motif library contained 464 vertebrate nucleotide distribution matrices grouped into 151 matrix families [57] . Motifs identified with matrices from the same family were treated as the same nonredundant (n-r) motif identified by the family name. An instance of a n-r motif X in a given CNS is defined as conserved, if both the human and the rat sequence of this CNS contain at least one instance of X (not necessarily in the same AVID-aligned position). According to this definition, TRAM contains 1061884 instances of conserved n-r motifs. Only the conserved n-r motifs, referred to as "motifs" in the main text, were used in further analysis.
A composite motif X_Y_... is defined to have an instance in a CNS if this CNS contains at least one instance of each of the conserved n-r motifs X, Y, ... . Note that every single motif is also a composite motif.
In our model of transcription regulation the set of Bayesian network vertices is split into two subsets: cisregulatory features (composite motifs) and expression patterns (sign of the loading of a particular eigensystem). Furthermore, all the edges lead from cis-regulatory features to a particular expression pattern. In order to identify these relationships, we learn Bayesian networks from a dataset joining cis-regulatory and expression data for each gene. The input dataset joins presence or absence of every composite motif with the sign of loading of a single conserved eigensystem ( Figure 4C, D) .
In Step 1 of our procedure (not illustrated) over 100 promising composite motifs (built of up to three motifs) associated with the sign of the chosen eigensystem are identified. Only these selected composite motifs are then used as the input for the Step 2 ( Figure 4E ) identifying the best sets of composite motifs and their conditional probability distributions ( Figure 4F ). Each set of composite motifs has a q-value derived from 1000 random permutations of gene labels. For each permutation we created a new cis-regulatory dataset (with gene labels permuted accordingly) and learned the optimal composite motif set. Both steps of a learning procedure were performed with the BNFinder software [29] -a Python package for learning Bayesian networks from data. BNFinder implements the polynomial time learning algorithm dedicated to dynamic Bayesian networks, as well as to static ones with constraints forcing the network acyclicity [58] , as is the case here.
We used the Bayesian-Dirichlet equivalence (BDe) [59, 60] criterion with priors on the conditional probability distributions according to [59] . A prior on the network structures is proportional to the product of penalty parameters over all the edges in the graph of the refined model. Furthermore, penalty parameters increase with composite motif size. This choice results in a preference for sparse graphs, and thus protects our procedure from overfitting. BN score of a composite motif set was computed as the ratio of its posterior probability to the posterior probability of the empty set. To permit the cross-system validation of BN scores, the sets of composite motifs selected during Step 1 for the corresponding eigensystems (e.g. A2-M2) from either dataset were combined to form their union, which was then used during Step 2.
The motif count per gene was defined as the number of instances of conserved non-redundant motifs in the rat sequences of all the CNSs assigned to this gene. Only the genes with at least one CNS were used in the univariate regression analysis when the count of a particular motif was used as the regressor variable. When the CNS count, or CNS count and the motif count, were used as the regressor variable(s), the genes with zero CNS count were also included during the analysis
The single gene loadings of eigensystems 2, 3 were not normally distributed, which precludes statistical interpretation of the results of the regression with singlegene loadings used as the response variable. Therefore, in linear regression analysis, we decided to use the average loadings of a particular eigensystem in groups of genes with the same motif count as the response variable. In the regression analysis on the average values we confirmed the approximate normality of the residua (Additional file 3). Since the average values for different motif counts were computed from different numbers of observations, generally decreasing with the motif count, which was accompanied by changing variance of the loadings, we employed the Goldfeld-Quandt (GQ) test to detect the existence and magnitude of heteroskedasticity. Results of this test indicate that (i) for MCAO data heretoscedastic errors were detected (p < 0.05) in all the regression models. Therefore, we used weighted least squares approach, with weights set to the number of genes in each group [31] , which is the well-known solution to the heteroskedasticity problem. The regression analysis was performed in Mathematica 7, and the GQ tests were performed in R.
B cells provide a two-pronged defense against invading pathogens. B cells internalize specific antigens via their surface Ig (sIg) 1 receptors, process the antigen into peptides, and present the peptides to T cells in the context of the B cells' class II MHC. In this manner, they act as sentinels and survey the body for the presence of nonself-antigens. If nonself-antigens are detected, B cells undergo a complex developmental program to generate large quantities of high-affinity neutralizing antibodies that help in clearing the pathogen from the host. To encounter antigen and to obtain help in generating a potent humoral response, the fulfillment of these two complex tasks requires that B cells migrate into specific areas at specific times during their development. Although the physical site(s) of B cell precursor development and differentiation in the bone marrow (BM) remain poorly defined, mature peripheral B cell subsets occupy characteristic microenvironments or domains. The major B cell microenvironment in all secondary lymphoid tissues is the primary follicle. The follicle contains recirculating naive B cells that sample secondary lymphoid organs such as the spleen, LNs, and Peyer's patches (PPs) for the presence of nonself-antigens and contribute to T celldependent humoral responses (1) . In the spleen, an additional B cell population occupies the marginal zone (MZ) that surrounds the white pulp and are positioned near the efficient antigen-trapping marginal sinus macrophages. MZ B cells are thought to sample blood-borne T cell-independent antigens that flow through the marginal sinus (2-4). They turn over more slowly than follicular B cells and recirculate poorly to other lymphoid organs (4, 5) , but are translocated rapidly into the splenic white pulp in response to endotoxin stimulation (6) . During active immune responses, the follicle or follicular mantle surrounds another distinct B cell microenvironment, the germinal center (GC). GCs are sites of antigen-driven proliferation, affinity maturation, and memory B cell generation (7, 8) . Finally, serosal surface cavities are populated by B1 or CD5 ϩ B cells, which may represent an alternative B cell development pathway. They are the primary source of natural antibodies and contribute to auto-antibody production in autoimmune diseases (9, 10) . The unique and distinctive microenvironmental location of each of these well-defined B cell populations requires that they display differential homing properties.
Chemotactic signals are thought to play important roles in leukocyte navigation by regulating migration from the blood into tissues, as well as subsequent microenvironmental localization within those tissues. The list of characterized leukocyte chemoattractants has grown rapidly with the identification of the chemoattractant cytokine (chemokine) superfamily (11) . Chemokines send directional signals to leukocytes by binding to seven transmembrane receptors that are coupled to pertussis toxin-inhibitable G ␣ i G protein heterotrimers. Most leukocytes express multiple chemokine and other chemoattractant receptors in overlapping patterns as a function of their development and activation state. Cells expressing multiple receptors can navigate in a step-by-step fashion through spatial arrays of overlapping chemokine and chemoattractant gradients (12) . Thus, the migration and microenvironmental targeting of leukocytes are thought to be determined as a function (in part) of the set of chemokines to which they can respond: their chemokine response profile or "fingerprint."
Several chemokines attract primary B cells or B cell lines and have been hypothesized to play a role in the homing and microenvironmental localization of B cell subsets at different stages of antigen-independent and -dependent B cell differentiation (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) . To explore the signals that guide B cells, we identified chemokines to which developing and mature B cells respond and assessed how those responses change as the B cells develop and populate various locales throughout the body. Our results reveal dramatic developmental switches in chemotactic response profiles during B cell development and suggest that altered chemotactic responses may play a major role in determining the migration patterns of developing B cells emigrating to the periphery after differentiation in the BM. Conversely, the major peripheral mature B cell subsets (follicular, MZ, GC, and B1 B cells) display surprisingly similar responses to the known secondary lymphoid and follicular chemokines, suggesting that microenvironmental localization in the periphery involves additional uncharacterized elements.
Mice. Male and female C57BL/6 mice were housed and bred at the Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care Systems mouse facility under specific pathogen-free conditions.
Flow Cytometric and Chemokine Reagents. The following antibodies were used (specificities and modifications in parentheses), all from PharMingen: RA3-6B2 (allophycocyanin [APC]-conjugated rat anti-mouse CD45R/B220); 145-2C11 (biotin-conjugated Armenian hamster anti-mouse CD3 ⑀ ); AF6-78 (PE-conjugated rat anti-mouse IgM b ); 53-7.3 (PE-conjugated anti-mouse CD5); 1D3 (PE-conjugated rat anti-mouse CD19); B3B4 (PEconjugated rat anti-mouse CD23); M1/69 (PE-conjugated rat anti-mouse CD24 [heat-stable antigen, HSA]); 11-26c.2a (FITCconjugated rat anti-mouse IgD); II/41 (FITC-conjugated rat anti-mouse IgM); 145-2C11 (FITC-conjugated Armenian hamster anti-mouse CD3 ⑀ ); 7G6 (FITC-conjugated rat anti-mouse CD21); M1/69 (FITC-conjugated rat anti-mouse CD24 [HSA]); S7 (FITC-conjugated rat anti-mouse CD43); and PK136 (FITCconjugated rat anti-mouse NK1.1). Purified rabbit anti-mouse CXC chemokine receptor (CXCR)5 was obtained from Dr. Jason Cyster (University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA), and biotin-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG was purchased from PharMingen. Rat anti-mouse CXCR3 (5B4) and CC chemokine receptor (CCR)6 (1C12) mAb supernatants were obtained from LeukoSite, and biotin-conjugated mouse anti-rat IgG H ϩ L was purchased from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories. Peridinine chlorophyll protein (PerCP)-conjugated streptavidin (SAv; Becton Dickinson) was used to visualize biotinylated anti-mouse CD3 ⑀ , anti-mouse CXCR3, anti-mouse CXCR5, and anti-mouse CCR6. FITC-conjugated peanut agglutinin (PNA; EY Laboratories) was used to visualize GC cells. Technical grade rat IgG was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co.
The following chemokines were purchased from PeproTech: recombinant mouse eotaxin, human I-309, mouse JE (monocyte chemoattractant protein [MCP]-1), mouse KC (Gro-␣ ), human macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-3 ␣ (liver and activation-regulated chemokine [LARC]), mouse regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), and human thymus and activation-regulated chemokine (TARC). The following chemokines were purchased from R&D Systems: recombinant human B cell-attracting chemokine 1 (BCA-1), recombinant mouse B lymphocyte chemoattractant (BLC), mouse monokine induced by IFN-␥ (MIG), mouse MIP-1 ␤ , rat MIP-3 ␣ (LARC), mouse MIP-3 ␤ (EBV-induced molecule 1 ligand chemokine [ELC]), mouse secondary lymphoid tissue chemoattractant (SLC, 6Ckine), and mouse thymus-expressed chemokine (TECK). Human stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1 ␣ was either provided by Gryphon or purchased from PeproTech.
Lymphocyte Isolation. 6-10-wk-old mice of both sexes were killed by cervical dislocation. Peripheral LNs (subiliac, proper axillary, accessory axillary, and cervical), mesenteric LNs, PPs, and spleen were harvested, minced with scissors in RPMI/10% bovine calf serum (BCS), and pressed through a wire mesh screen with a rubber syringe plunger. Peritoneal cavity cells were harvested by injecting 10 ml of RPMI/10% BCS into the peritoneal cavity using a 27-gauge needle, agitating the cavity periodically for 5 min, and removing the lymphocyte-rich solution with a 19-gauge needle. BM cells were harvested by dissecting the femur and tibia, removing all muscle from the bone, cutting the ends off the bones, flushing with 3 ml of RPMI/10% BCS through both ends of the bone, and passing the disrupted marrow though a wire mesh screen. Splenocytes and BM cells were depleted of erythrocytes by lysis in ACK buffer (5 min at room temperature). The lymphocytes were allowed to incubate in RPMI/10% BCS for 1 h at 37 Њ C in a CO 2 incubator in T-75 flasks to remove tissue culture flask adherent cells and to allow time for resensitization of potentially desensitized chemokine responses.
Chemotaxis Assay and Quantitation. Chemotaxis assays were performed in 5-m pore transwell inserts as described by Campbell et al. (21) , with the following modifications. Chemokines were used at the following concentrations: 500 nM BCA-1, 1 nM JE, 100 nM MCP-3, 100 nM MIG, 10 nM MIP-1 ␣ , 3 nM MIP-1 ␤ , 100 nM MIP-3 ␣ , 100 nM MIP-3 ␤ , 100 nM RANTES, 50 nM SDF-1 ␣ , 100 nM SLC, and 300 nM TECK. The chemotaxis assay proceeded for 2 h, a known number of counting beads were added to each chemotaxis well after Transwell insert removal, and the contents of the chemotaxis well were transferred to a polypropylene pointed bottom tube. The beads and cells were centrifuged at 200 g for 10 min, excess medium was removed, and the cells were resuspended in 25 l of cold Staining Buffer (PBS/1 mM MgCl 2 /1 mM CaCl 2 /0.1% NaN 3 /2% Fraction V BSA) containing 30 g of rat IgG (Sigma Chemical Co.). The cells were incubated on ice for 15 min and 25 l of the appropriate antibody cocktail was added. The cells were further incubated on ice for 30 min, washed with 3 ml of Staining Buffer, centrifuged, and incubated with 50 l of Staining Buffer containing 2.5 l Sav-PerCP for 30 min. The cells were either washed, centrifuged, and analyzed by flow cytometry (non-PNA-stained cells), or incubated with 50 l of PNA-FITC for 4-6 min, stopped by addition of 3 ml of PBS/2% formaldehyde or Staining Buffer, centrifuged, and analyzed by flow cytometry (for some PP B cell staining).
Chemokine Receptor Staining. The indicated lymphoid organs were disrupted and lymphocytes were isolated as described. The cells were incubated for 1 h at 37 Њ C to remove tissue culture plate-adherent cells. 5 ϫ 10 5 lymphocytes were stained with either purified rabbit anti-mouse CXCR5 polyclonal antibody at 1:25 dilution or purified rabbit anti-R-ras (0.5 g) as a negative control in 25 l of Staining Buffer (22) . Cells were washed and stained with biotin-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG. Cells were washed, blocked with 30 g rat IgG, and incubated with the appropriate cocktail of conjugated antibodies (and SAv-PerCP) to visualize the relevant B cell populations. 10 6 lymphocytes were stained with supernatants from either rat anti-mouse CXCR3 mAb, rat anti-mouse CCR6 mAb, or irrelevant control supernatants (HECA-452, MK2.7). Cells were washed and stained with biotin-conjugated mouse anti-rat IgG H ϩ L. Cells were washed, blocked with 30 g rat IgG, and incubated with the appropriate cocktail of conjugated antibodies (and SAv-PerCP) to visualize the relevant B cell populations.
During chemokine receptor staining of the splenic Transition 1 population, anti-mouse CD3 ⑀ -FITC, was included with B220-APC, CD23-PE, and CD21-FITC to prevent B220 ϩ T cells (which do not have CD23 or CD21) from contaminating the Transition 1 population (B220 ϩ CD23 Ϫ CD21 Ϫ /lo ). During chemokine receptor staining of PP GC B cells, B220 ϩ T cells were excluded from analysis by staining with B220-APC, CD19-PE, and PNA-FITC because B cells but not B220 ϩ T cells express CD19.
Pro-B CFU Assay. Unfractioned BM cells were isolated and allowed to migrate to chemokines as described. Responding cells from two chemotaxis wells (input 2E6 BM cells per Transwell insert) were harvested, pelleted by centrifugation, and resuspended in 75 l of RPMI/10% BCS. 1.35 ml of Methocult M3630 containing 10 ng/ml recombinant human IL-7 (StemCell Technologies Inc.) was aliquoted into 12 ϫ 75 mm polypropylene tubes, and 75 l of recombinant murine flt3 ligand (Flt3-L; R&D Systems) was added to give a final concentration of 50 ng/ ml Flt3-L (based on the methods of Hunte et al. [23] and Veiby et al. [24] ). Responding cells were added to the Methocult mixture, vortexed for 5 s, and aliquoted to 35 ϫ 10 mm tissue culture polystyrene dishes using a 20-gauge needle. Multiple plates were placed in a 150 ϫ 15 mm plate containing an uncovered 35 ϫ 10 mm plate filled with water to prevent dehydration. The plates were incubated in a 37 Њ C incubator for 12-17 d. Colonies were identified and counted using a dissecting microscope. Colonies were harvested by removing them with a pipette and stained with B220-APC, HSA-biotin/SAv-PerCP, CD19-PE, and Mac-1-FITC to confirm the pro-B colony identification. The TECKresponding pro-B CFUs only became apparent in the second week of the assay, and they were tightly compact colonies compared with a few very spread and disorganized B220 Ϫ colonies that were found in all assays (including the Basal Medium control plates). Many pro-B CFU colonies had a multilobed shape or were a collection of three to six small colonies very close together. In all cases, these were counted as a single colony because the relatively few number of colonies per plate did not suggest that these colonies arose from multiple pro-B CFUs that happen to settle out close together.

Profiles during B Cell Development in the BM. B cells develop in the BM through sequential developmental stages, from stem cells to multipotent progenitors to pre-pro-B cells, to pro-B cells, to pre-B cells, and finally to immature B cells. After commitment to the B cell lineage, these stages have been associated with particular surface phenotypic markers according to Hardy et al. and Li et al. (25, 26) . To explore the developmental control of the chemotaxis response profiles during B cell development, we assessed the chemotactic responses of cells at each of these antigenically defined stages (Fig. 1 A) . A panel of chemokines was selected that bound all of the currently described CC and CXC receptors (Table I). Naive splenic ␦ ϩ follicular B cells ( ϭ sIgM heavy chain, and ␦ ϭ sIgD heavy chain), the most abundant mature peripheral B cell population, were evaluated in parallel for comparison. Chemokines were titered from 0.1-100 nM (TECK was tested up to 1 M and BCA-1 was tested up to 2.5 M), and results shown here reflect responses to the concentrations that gave the optimal migration of BM and peripheral B cells (concentrations used are given in the legend of Table I ). No significant difference was observed in the dose-response curves to any chemokine by any B cell subset analyzed in this paper (differences in the magnitude of response will be presented below).
None of the BM B cell populations nor the splenic ␦ ϩ B cells responded to eotaxin, TARC, I-309, or KC; migration to these chemokines at all concentrations tested was indistinguishable from background migration (data not shown). Non-B cell populations present in the BM and periphery responded to KC and TARC, confirming these chemokines' activity in our assay. MIP-3 ␣ , a well-characterized peripheral lymphocyte-active chemokine also failed to attract B lineage cells in the BM (but see next section). All populations responded fairly equally to SDF-1 ␣ , confirming their competence to migrate under our experimental conditions (Fig. 1 C) .
Interestingly, cells of pre-pro-B cell phenotype (B220 lo HSA Ϫ /lo AA4.1 ϩ NK1.1 Ϫ ; a subpopulation within the original Fraction A population of Hardy et al. [25] that combines the A1 and A2 fractions [26] ) displayed substantial migration to RANTES, JE (mouse MCP-1), MIG, and TECK, chemokines associated with monocyte and/or activated T cell responses in the periphery. As illustrated in Fig. 1 B, these cells responded well, but the response to these chemokines was lost rapidly during progression to the pro-B cell stage. B cell migration to these chemokines was not observed in any more developed BM B cell or peripheral B cell population tested (follicular ␦ ϩ B cells to the right of the dotted line are shown as an example of a peripheral B cell population). In preliminary experiments, MIP-1 ␣ , MIP-1 ␤ , and MCP-3 stimulated migration of Fraction A BM B cells (data not shown). As these chemokines are known to bind the same receptors as RANTES Unfractioned BM cells were prepared and added to inserts that were placed in wells containing the following chemokines: 100 nM RANTES, 1 nM JE, 100 nM MIG, or 300 nM TECK. Responding cells were harvested and stained with either B220-APC, unlabeled AA4.1/mouse anti-rat IgG-biotin/SAv-PerCP, HSA-PE, and NK1.1-FITC or AA4.1-APC, HSA-biotin/SAv-PerCP, B220-PE, NK1.1-FITC to identify the AA4.1 ϩ NK1.1 Ϫ Fraction A population or with combinations of B220-APC, IgM b -PE, HSA-PE, and CD43-FITC to identify the later stages during B cell development. The data are the mean Ϯ SEM from two to eight experiments. (C) Responses to peripheral lymphoid chemokines appear late during BM B cell development. Same procedure as above except the following chemokines were used: 100 nM MIP-3␣, 100 nM SLC, 100 nM MIP-3␤, 50 nM SDF-1␣, and 500 nM BCA-1. The data are the mean Ϯ SEM from 3-15 experiments. All symbols have error bars even though in some instances (i.e., Basal migration and pro-B/BCA-1 migration) the error bars are smaller than the symbol.
Chemokine Receptor
The chemokines were used at the following concentrations: 100 nM MIP-1␣, 100 nM MCP-3, 1 nM JE, 100 nm Eotaxin, 100 nM TARC, 100 nM RANTES, 3 nM MIP-1␤, 100 nM MIP-3␣, 100 nM MIP-3␤, 100 nM SLC, 100 nM I-309, 300 nM TECK, 100 nM KC, 100 nM MIG, 50 nM SDF-1␣, or 500 nM BCA-1. *Mouse SLC, but not human SLC, binds to CXCR3 (reference 64).
and JE (Table I) , they were not used in subsequent experiments.
To confirm that the Fraction A1/A2 responses to these chemokines included B lineage cells, BM cells were allowed migrate to each of these chemokines and the responding cells were placed into subsequent assays that facilitated growth of B lineage progenitors into colonies of pro-B cells or pro-B CFUs by incubation with IL-7 and Flt3-L in methylcellulose (23, 24) . BM cells capable of generating pro-B CFUs responded to TECK (Fig. 2) , whereas RANTES and JE were much weaker at attracting pro-B CFUs and no response over control was seen to MIG. The TECK-responding cells required both IL-7 and Flt3-L to generate colonies, as they yielded much fewer colonies in the CFU assay with only IL-7 (data not shown). Therefore, very early B lineage progenitors can respond to TECK and this response is lost as B cells enter into the pro-B compartment.
The loss of response to TECK during B cell development occurred at the same stage as a gain of responsiveness to chemokines associated with homing in secondary lymphoid organs: SLC, MIP-3␤, and BCA-1 (16) . BCA-1 (BLC), a chemokine implicated in B cell entry into the follicles of PPs and spleen (but interestingly, not most PLNs [27] ) is of particular interest in the context of B cell behavior and microenvironmental homing. It is known to attract the majority of B cells in the periphery, as well as a small subset of CD4 ϩ T cells. We found that there is a consistent but small response in the pro-B cell compartment (P Ͻ 0.02 by Mann-Whitney rank sum test) that is lost with progression to the pre-B cell stage. Regained BCA-1 responsiveness in the immature B cell compartment is consistently observed, but the magnitude was variable from experiment to experiment. Mature peripheral ␦ ϩ B cells responded strongly to BCA-1.
The differential migration of gated B220 ϩ BM subpopulations to chemokines is illustrated in Fig. 3 . Responding B lineage cells (bold lines) are stained for various markers and compared with the B lineage cells in the initial input population (light line) after migration to SLC (Fig. 3, left) and BCA-1 (Fig. 3, right) . BM B cells that respond to SLC and to BCA-1 are enriched for IgM expression, but they are not identical populations. SLC-responding BM B cells contain both IgM Ϫ and IgM ϩ cells, with an enrichment in IgM ϩ cells (Fig. 3 A) . Conversely, only IgM ϩ cells are found after chemotaxis to BCA-1 (Fig. 3 B) , consistent with later acquisition of BCA-1 responsiveness. As a control, we showed that incubation with various chemokines did not change the surface level expression of any of the markers used in this study (data not shown).
Receptor expression for one of the Fraction A1/A2 chemokines, MIG, was investigated in order to study the unexpected chemotactic responses by these cells in more detail. The only known receptor for MIG is CXCR3 (11), and we used an anti-mouse CXCR3 mAb in combination with the staining cocktails described above to visualize CXCR3 expression at the different stages of B cell development in Fig. 4 A. Fraction A1/A2 cells (Fig. 4 A, first column) displayed very low to no staining with anti-CXCR3 mAb, whereas the AA4.1 Ϫ Fraction A subpopulation displayed fairly uniform CXCR3 staining (data not shown). No B lineage cells at later stages of development in the BM or in the periphery (Fig. 4 A, last column) expressed CXCR3, consistent with their failure to migrate to MIG (Fig. 1 B) . Flow cytometry plots illustrate the selectivity of chemokine responses by antigenically defined B cell subsets. Unfractioned BM cells were prepared and added to inserts that were placed in wells containing either 100 nM SLC (left) or 500 nM BCA-1 (right). Initial input (light line) and responding (bold line) cells were harvested and stained with different combinations of B220-APC, IgM b -PE, and CD43-FITC. All panels were gated on B220 ϩ cells. The presented histograms were obtained by overlaying individual histograms from three to four experiments, adding them together using CELLQuest™ software (Becton Dickinson) to obtain an average representative histogram, and normalizing them to the peak cell number. CTX, chemotaxis.
As the biphasic response pattern of BM B cells to BCA-1 was unique among the peripherally important chemokines tested, we further explored this chemokine-chemokine receptor interaction by determining the expression pattern of the only known receptor for BCA-1, CXCR5 (14, 15) . No detectable expression of CXCR5 above background was observed in the Fraction A1/A2 or pre-B cell population (Fig. 4 B, first and third column). CXCR5 expression was detectable on a subset of the pro-B cell population (Fig. 4 B, second column) , although the magnitude of the shift was variable. The immature B cell population displayed CXCR5 (Fig. 4 B, fourth column) but the frequency of expression was again variable, consistent with their variable responses to BCA-1. In contrast, splenic ␦ ϩ follicular B cells were uniformly and strongly CXCR5 ϩ (Fig. 4 B, (Fig. 5 B) . Moreover, the responses of putative blood-borne peripheral B cells passing through the BM at the time of harvest (Fraction F in the classification scheme of Hardy et al. [25] , B220 hi CD43 Ϫ sIgM ϩ ) were indistinguishable from those of splenic follicular ␦ ϩ B cells (data not shown).
CXCR5 expression increases, paralleling BCA-1 responsiveness, as B cells exit the BM and progress through the transitional stages into recirculating ␦ ϩ follicular B cells. Few immature BM B cells expressed significant levels of CXCR5 (Fig. 5 D, first column) , but a majority of Transition 1 recent emigrants expressed CXCR5 (Fig. 5 D,  second column) , and expression became more uniform and more intense on Transition 2 and ␦ ϩ follicular B cells ( Fig. 5 D, third and fourth columns) . CCR6 shows a different temporal pattern of acquisition compared with CXCR5. CCR6 is undetectable on any BM B cell population (Fig. 4 C, first four columns) including immature BM B cells and the Transition 1 B cells to which they give rise (Fig. 5 C, first and second columns, respectively) . In contrast, all Transition 2 and recirculating ␦ ϩ follicular B cells display uniform CCR6 expression (Fig. 5 C, (Fig. 6 A) . In stimulated lymphoid tissues, such as PPs, B cells in GCs are identified as B220 ϩ cells that have higher level expression of terminal galactosyl residues that are recognized by the plant lectin peanut agglutinin (PNA hi ) compared with the surrounding B220 ϩ PNA lo follicular mantle subset (Fig. 6 B [32-34] ). In addition, GC B cells are ␦ Ϫ compared with the follicular mantle ␦ ϩ B cells. In the experiments described here, we analyzed the migration properties of cells in each of these regions individually.
Splenic follicular (B220 hi CD21 int CD23 int ) and MZ (B220 ϩ CD21 hi CD23 lo/Ϫ) B cells migrate with similar efficiency to SLC, SDF-1␣, and BCA-1 (Fig. 7 B) . In contrast to IgM ϩ immature BM B cells and Transition 1 B cells (Fig. 5 A) , follicular B cells also migrate significantly to MIP-3␣ (Fig. 7 A) . MZ splenocytes also respond to MIP-3␣, but substantially less efficiently (Fig. 7 A) . Follicular B cells are also found in peripheral LNs, mesenteric LNs, and PPs (also called follicular mantle B cells if GCs are present); however, MZ B cells are far less numerous in these organs compared with spleen (35) . As expected, LN (data not shown) and PP (Fig. 7, E and F) follicular B cell subsets displayed very similar chemotactic fingerprints to those of their splenic counterparts. The only difference observed was that the MIP-3␣ responses of splenic follicular B cells were less pronounced in the corresponding PP (Fig. 7 E) and LN (data not shown but similar to PP) populations. Chemotaxis profiles of CD3⑀ ϩ B220 Ϫ T cells found in the corresponding organs are shown for comparison.
The expression of CCR6 and CXCR5 correlates with the functional responses to MIP-3␣ and BCA-1 by splenic B cells. In Fig. 7 C (second column) , staining for CCR6 ϩ reveals a sharp, uniform peak of expression on CD21 int CD23 int follicular B cells, whereas CD21 hi CD23 Ϫ/lo MZ B cells display broader and dimmer CCR6 expression levels ( Fig. 7 C, first column) . Fig. 7 D shows a sharp, uniform were prepared and stained with B220-APC, CD3⑀-biotin/SAv-PerCP, CD23-PE, and CD21-FITC for spleen or B220-APC, CD3⑀-biotin/ SAv-PerCP, and PNA-FITC for PPs. The data shown have been gated on the B220 ϩ CD3⑀ Ϫ population. peak of CXCR5 expression on both CD21 int CD23 int follicular (second column) and CD21 hi CD23 Ϫ/lo MZ (first column) B cells. The levels of CCR6 and CXCR5 on peripheral LN and PP Region 1 B cells are identical to the levels observed on splenic follicular B cells (data not shown). Similar CXCR5 expression by follicular and MZ B cells has been observed by Cyster et al. (22) . No detectable CXCR3 expression was observed on splenic or PP B cells (data not shown).
We studied GC B cells in PPs, secondary lymphoid organs of the gut wall, which are chronically stimulated by their constant exposure to food-borne antigens and the intestinal microflora. PP GC B cells (B220 ϩ PNA hi ) responded to SLC, SDF-1␣, and BCA-1 as well as the unactivated follicular mantle B cell population (B220 ϩ PNA lo ), with a slight reduction in the SDF-1␣ response (Fig. 7 F) . Interestingly, GC B cells in the PPs of C57BL/6 mice (the principle strain studied here) displayed somewhat enhanced chemotaxis to MIP-3␣ (Fig. 7 E) . In contrast, GC B cells in the PPs of Balb/c mice displayed significantly reduced MIP-3␣ responses compared with their follicular mantle counterparts (data not shown). In spite of their relatively efficient migration to MIP-3␣, many C57BL/6 GC B cells lacked CCR6 expression (Fig. 7 C, fourth column), with only a small number displaying high levels comparable to PP follicular B cells (Fig. 7 C, third column). PP GC B cells displayed uniform levels of CXCR5 expression (Fig. 7 D , fourth column) that were similar in magnitude to splenic follicular (Fig. 7 D, second column) and PP follicular mantle (Fig. 7 D, third column CD5 ϩ Ly-1 ϩ B cells are part of the preimmune repertoire and may arise via an alternative developmental pathway. They are self-renewing (1) and are associated with autoimmune diseases and B cell leukemias and lymphomas (10) . Peritoneal B1 B cells are B220 lo and most are CD5 ϩ and CD43 ϩ (1). The conventional B cells (termed B2) in the peritoneal cavity have higher levels of B220 and are CD5 Ϫ and CD43 Ϫ . Both types of B cells from the peritoneal cavity had zero to very low basal migration compared with any of the other B cell populations we tested (Fig. 8, A and  B) . Both B1 and B2 B cells responded to SLC, SDF-1␣, and BCA-1 equally well, though to a lesser degree than splenic B cells (compare Fig. 8 B with Fig. 7 B) , and their response to MIP-3␣ was reduced compared with splenic B cells (compare Fig. 8 A with Fig. 7 A) . CCR6 expression was demonstrated on both B1 and B2 cells, although background staining of B1 B cells was relatively high (Fig. 8 C) . Both B cell populations expressed high levels of the BCA-1 receptor CXCR5 (Fig. 8 D) . Cyster et al. has also demonstrated CXCR5 expression on peritoneal cavity B1 B cells (22) .
A central tenet of current models of leukocyte trafficking is that coordinated regulation of adhesive and migratory responses controls cellular positioning or homing in vivo (36) . In turn, this homing determines the leukocyte's cellular and microenvironmental interactions, and therefore its fate and function. For example, developmental switches in homing receptor and vascular addressin expression have been implicated in the maturation of peripheral lymphoid tissue during the perinatal period (37) and in developmental and antigen-induced transitions in T cells (38, 39) . We show here that developing B lineage cells undergo dramatic alterations in their chemotactic responses to different chemokines, alterations that may help define particular stages of B cell maturation and may regulate their cellular and microenvironmental interactions, development, and/ or function. We will discuss our findings in relation to (a) the major changes that occur during B lineage development, including the unique expression of a TECK response during an early B lineage stage and a dramatic switch to peripheral secondary lymphoid organ-expressed chemokine responses associated with B cell export from the marrow compartment, and (b) the patterns of chemokine responses displayed by B cells occupying different microenvironmental niches in the periphery.
We first addressed the chemokine responses of B cells at their earliest committed stage of development in the adult BM. B cell genesis derives from dividing hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) that differentiate into progenitor cells, which in turn give rise to various hematopoietic lineages. The first identifiable BM cells committed to the B lineage are Fraction A1/A2 (AA4.1 ϩ NK1.1 Ϫ cells within Fraction A [25, 26, 40] ); these cells still have their Ig genes in the germline state but display the B lineage marker B220. Surprisingly, we found that a significant fraction of AA4.1 ϩ NK1.1 Ϫ Fraction A cells, unlike B lineage cells at later stages of development, migrate in response to RANTES, JE (mouse MCP-1), MIG, and TECK. These chemokines attract monocytes (RANTES and JE) and subsets of T cells (RANTES, JE, MIG, TECK) in the periphery, but have no activity on mature B cells.
Limiting dilution analysis of B220 Ϫ HSA Ϫ AA4.1 ϩ CD4 ϩ multipotent progenitors demonstrated that a large number of colonies derived from single cells gave rise to progeny colonies containing both B cells and macrophages, suggesting a close developmental relationship between monocytes and B cells (40) . These data, and the observation of bipo- tential precursors of B cells and macrophages in the fetal liver (41), may explain the low level responses of AA4.1 ϩ NK1.1 Ϫ Fraction A cells to seemingly monocytic chemokines if both cell types arose from a common precursor. Interestingly, a recent report has shown that CXCR3 is expressed on leukemic B cells from all patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and is found on a subset of other B cell leukemias and lymphomas (42) . In other studies, we have found that the JE/MCP-1 response in Fraction A cells is absent in CCR2-deficient mice, further confirming the association of functional responses with specific chemokine receptor expression (Bowman, E., unpublished results). However, the lack of significant response by RANTES-, JE-, and MIG-responding cells in secondary pro-B CFU assays (Fig. 2) lessens the emphasis we can place on these chemokine responses in the scheme of B cell development. Other non-B lineage cells within the Fraction A gate including AA4.1 Ϫ NK1.1 ϩ immature NK precursors (26, 43) migrate very efficiently to these chemokines, and the responses seen in the AA4.1 ϩ NK1.1 Ϫ population may be due to contaminating non-B lineage cells that fall within the flow cytometry gates we have set. AA4.1 ϩ Fraction A cells do not express consistently detectable levels of CXCR3 (Fig. 4 A) even though they consistently migrated to MIG (Fig. 1 B) . Either this population expresses another undescribed MIG receptor or they may express levels of CXCR3 that, while functional, are much lower than those on CXCR3 ϩ AA4.1 Ϫ Fraction A cells, levels beneath our detection limits. Preliminary studies suggest that earlier HSCs, like later stage B lineage cells shown here, are also unresponsive to these chemokines (data not shown).
TECK was the only chemokine that could effectively migrate BM cells that would give rise to pro-B CFUs in the presence of IL-7 and Flt3-L (Fig. 2) , but not IL-7 alone (data not shown). IL-7 alone stimulates the proliferation of late pro-B cells and early pre-B cells, but early pro-B cells, pre-B cells, and immature B cells are unresponsive (23) . Flt3-L can not stimulate the proliferation of any B lineage population alone, but Flt3-L synergizes with IL-7 to increase the growth of Lineage Ϫ /Sca-1 ϩ BM cells (a heterogeneous population of cells containing B cell progenitors before they express B220 [24] ) and the B cell progenitors among the B220 lo CD43 ϩ HSA Ϫ/lo Fraction A population (23) . These data combined suggests that TECK selectively attracts very early B220 ϩ B lineage progenitors (23) and/or B220 Ϫ BM cells with potential to develop into B220 ϩ B cells (24) , as these cell types require both IL-7 and Flt3-L for growth into pro-B colonies.
It is attractive to postulate that responsiveness to TECK (and potentially RANTES and JE) by B lineage progenitors may help target them into supportive specialized niches appropriate to their developmental stage, and that downregulation of this (these) response with subsequent maturation would then allow their progression to different marrow microenvironments. However, B lineage progenitors may respond to these chemokines not only as chemotactic agents, but also as growth promoting and/or arresting cytokines. Several chemokines have been demonstrated to have potent effects on the growth of BM progenitors (especially myeloid progenitors) (44-48) and a feedback system has been hypothesized whereby chemokines produced in the periphery control the further production of different leukocyte lineages. Therefore, B lineage progenitor responses to these chemokines may play a role in the total B cell output by the BM by regulating the total number of B lineage cells that are allowed to develop.
As Interestingly, B lineage cells at all stages of development migrate with similar efficiency to SDF-1␣, at least when assayed at the optimal chemotactic concentrations used here. This finding of uniform SDF-1␣ responsiveness is similar to that of Kim et al. (49) . However, it contrasts with the results by D'Apuzzo et al. (50) ; these authors report that early B lineage cells from mouse BM migrate much better to SDF-1␣ than do more developed B cells, and postulated that SDF-1␣ selectively attracts and confines early B cell precursors within the BM. The basis for this difference is unclear. Our results and those of Kim et al. also raise the possibility that apparent effects of SDF-1␣ and CXCR4 on B cell retention in the BM may reflect secondary or indirect effects, rather than a direct SDF-1␣-mediated retention mechanism. One scenario would be that stromal-produced SDF-1␣ stimulates hematopoietic non-B cells in the BM to produce the factor required to retain B cells in BM until their development is complete, at which time the B cells would lose responsiveness to this factor and exit the BM. Reconstitution of lethally irradiated mice with CXCR4 ϪրϪ fetal liver cells (as performed by Ma et al. [51] ) would leave both the hypothetical non-B cell and B lineage cells incapable of responding to stromal-produced SDF-1␣. In this indirect manner, B lineage cells would not be retained in the BM, but this would be due to the lack of action of SDF-1␣ on the non-B cell, which then prevent expression of the pro-retention factor, instead of a direct SDF-1␣-B cell interaction. Also unclear is the significance of the increased SDF-1␣ responsiveness in B cells after exit to the periphery, since CXCR4 Ϫ/Ϫ lymphocytes migrate to secondary lymphoid organs and repopulate their niches efficiently (51) .
Though sIgM ϩ immature BM B cells respond to SLC, MIP-3␤, SDF-1␣, and BCA-1, the magnitude of the responses by B cells increases substantially after their migration to the spleen (i.e., as transitioning recent emigrants). These heightened responses are further increased after progression of the splenic Transition 1 B cells into Transition 2 B cells. No further increase in responsiveness to these chemokines is seen as Transition 2 B cells convert into the naive, recirculating ␦ ϩ B cells. In the case of BCA-1 responses, the increased chemotaxis is associated with an increase in both the frequency and intensity of CXCR5 expression (Fig. 5, B and D) .
BCA-1 is preferentially expressed by dendritic cells in B cell follicles (14) . Along with its receptor, CXCR5, it has been postulated to control B cell entry into the follicular environment (14, 15, 52) . Consistent with studies of CXCR5 expression on human B cells by Forster et al. (52) , we observed that peripheral B cells migrate better to BCA-1 than immature BM B cells, supporting an important role for these molecules in peripheral B cell function. Moreover, we have found that (a) immature BM B cells respond relatively poorly to BCA-1; (b) there is an increased BCA-1 response in splenic transitioning populations; (c) the recirculating pool of splenic B cells possesses the most robust response to BCA-1 measured; and (d) CXCR5 expression and responsiveness to BCA-1 characterize all the major peripheral B cell subsets, including MZ B cells and B1 B cells-cells that are not associated with the follicular microenvironment. Together, these results indicate that CXCR5 expression and BCA-1 responsiveness are not, in and of themselves, sufficient to confer follicular localization to B cells. It is important to consider this conclusion in light of studies that demonstrated that CXCR5-deficient B cells display selective follicular localization defects in PPs and spleen (but not in most peripheral LNs, where follicular homing was normal [52] ).Taken together with our finding of CXCR5 expression and BCA-1 responsiveness by B cells that are normally excluded from the follicular compartment, these data suggest that follicular localization may be under complex (combinatorial) control as a function of tissue site (and other factors), so that a contribution of CXCR5 is essential in PPs and spleen, but is accessory or redundant in most normal LNs. BCA-1 may have other important functions in peripheral B cell biology as well.
The increasing responsiveness to SLC and MIP-3␤ during B cell maturation in and after emigration from the BM is of particular interest because these chemokines signal through a common receptor, CCR7, and have been implicated in directing peripheral lymphocyte homing. SLC but not MIP-3␤ can also signal through CXCR3 (53) , but this receptor is not expressed by peripheral B cells. SLC is made and displayed by high endothelial venule (HEV) cells (54, 55) , can trigger rapid shear-resistant integrin-dependent arrest of rolling lymphocytes (16, 56) , and has been implicated in the recognition and arrest of circulating lymphocytes on HEVs in PPs and LNs (55, 57) . SLC and MIP-3␤ are also expressed by stromal dendritic cells in T cell zones of all secondary lymphoid organs (54) . Although recent in situ studies show that B cells do not require SLC or MIP-3␤ signaling to arrest on HEVs in vivo (55) , the ability of all B cell subsets to respond to these chemokines may nevertheless permit or facilitate their entry into lymphoid organs from the blood, perhaps at the level of diapedesis as evidenced by the poor homing of CCR7 ϪրϪ B cells into LNs and PPs compared with wild-type B cells (58) . Interestingly, SLC is also expressed by lymphatic endothelium and has been implicated in lymphatic entry of activated dendritic cells. It may play a similar role for lymphatic recruitment of activated or memory lymphocytes in extralymphoid tissues. Thus, the upregulation of MIP-3␤ and SLC responses in association with B cell export to the periphery may facilitate mature B cell migration and circulation through secondary lymphoid organs at multiple levels.
Importantly, all mature peripheral B cell populations, including follicular and MZ B cells as well as GC and B1 B cells, respond equally well to SLC and MIP-3␤, as they do to SDF-1␣ and BCA-1. Therefore, although these chemokine responses may be critical to B cell trafficking in the periphery, they appear unlikely to be responsible for the specialized homing properties that target B cell subsets to distinct microenvironments.
B cell responses to MIP-3␣ were unique, in that detectable chemotaxis to MIP-3␣ was limited to a subset of peripheral mature B cells. No migration to MIP-3␣ and no CCR6 expression were observed in any BM B cell population, including the most developed sIgM ϩ immature BM B cell. Recently emigrated Transition 1 splenic B cells also lacked CCR6 and did not respond to MIP-3␣, but Transition 2 B cells and splenic follicular ␦ ϩ B cells are uniformly CCR6 ϩ and migrate consistently (albeit at lower efficiency than the other peripheral chemokines tested). Although only a subset of PP GC B cells display CCR6, GC B cells respond well to MIP-3␣, suggesting that the CCR6 ϩ GC B cells have an enhanced migratory response to this chemokine.
Our finding of significant MIP-3␣ responses in these mature B cell population conflicts with the conclusions by Liao et al. (59) , who were unable to generate a calcium flux with MIP-3␣ in human B cells in spite of low level uniform expression of CCR6, as revealed by mAb staining. They proposed that B cells are unresponsive to MIP-3␣. However, our chemotaxis data and parallel studies with human lymphocytes (Campbell, J.J., unpublished data) clearly demonstrate that B cells migrate to MIP-3␣. Moreover, in recent studies, Tanaka et al. confirm our findings that PP B cells migrate to MIP-3␣ and report an efficiency of MIP-3␣-induced chemotaxis similar to that observed here (20) .
MIP-3␣ is primarily expressed by epithelial cells, especially during inflammation or on epithelium associated with lymphoepithelial organs such as PPs. For example, in Northern blot analysis it is reportedly absent or only weakly expressed in resting spleen and LNs, but it is detectable in inflamed tonsils, intestine, and appendices (lymphoid tissues intimately associated with epithelial surfaces [20, [60] [61] [62] ). In situ hybridization studies reveal high level expression by antigen-recruiting epithelium in the lymphoepithelial tonsils and PPs (20, 61) . MIP-3␣ expression by such epithelium has been postulated to help recruit antigen-presenting dendritic cells, and it may also help define sites of B cell recruitment to epithelial-associated lymphoid organs, including PPs and also bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue. Such a concept might provide teleological explanation for the association of MIP-3␣ responses and CCR6 expression with follicle-homing B cell populations.
There are only minor differences in the chemotactic responses between resting follicular mantle and antigen-reactive GC B cells to the chemokines studied here. This contrasts with the results of Bleul et al. (63) , who showed that human tonsillar GC (CD38 ϩ ) B cells were unable to respond to SDF-1␣ even though they express the SDF-1␣ receptor CXCR4. We have extended their studies and examined the chemokine responsiveness of human tonsil B cells to MIP-3␣, SLC, and BCA-1 in addition to SDF-1␣. In each case, human tonsil GC B cells failed to respond to any of the chemokines tested, whereas tonsillar non-GC CD38 Ϫ B cells responded robustly (Campbell, J.J., unpublished observation). This discrepancy in functional responses may be due to a species difference between mice and humans, or alternatively may reflect differences in GCs from different lymphoid organs. In this context, it is relevant that we observed consistent significant strain-dependent differences in the GC B cell responses to MIP-3␣, suggesting genetic variability in GC responses.
Receptor expression alone has not proven an adequate parameter to predict a cell's chemotactic potential. Forster et al. reported that human tonsil GC CD38 ϩ B cells express CXCR5 on their surface (52) and Bleul et al. reported that human tonsil CD38 ϩ B cells express CXCR4 (63) even though these cells were unresponsive to the chemokines BCA-1 and SDF-1␣ (see above paragraph). We conclude that the functional measurement of chemotaxis is the only way to determine the chemotactic response profile for any given cell population. By assessing the correlation between function and surface expression of known receptors (as presented here for CCR6, CXCR3, and CXCR5), a secondary question can be investigated: Which receptors mediate the distinctive chemotactic fingerprints of cells? However, potential involvement of unidentified receptors (as yet) must always be kept in mind.
Both B1 and B2 B cells from the mouse peritoneal cavity respond to SLC, SDF-1␣, and BCA-1 with equal efficiency (albeit not as well as splenic follicular B cells). However, unlike splenic B cells, there was no response of B1 B cells and very little response of B2 B cells to MIP-3␣ even though both cell types expressed CCR6. It was surprising that B1 B cells, which are not found in great quantities in secondary lymphoid organs, can nevertheless respond to the follicle-associated chemokine BCA-1 and the HEVassociated chemokine SLC. If B1 B cells do arise through a unique developmental program (9, 10) , that program still enables them to respond to all the same chemokines (except MIP-3␣) to which more conventional B cells respond. As it seems unlikely that these lymphoid organ chemokines play a role in recruiting cells into the peritoneal or other serosal cavities, they may function in allowing B1 B cells to migrate or circulate through lymphoid tissues themselves.
In conclusion, we have uncovered a dynamic regulation of the chemotactic responses of B cells as they progress through development (Fig. 9 ). Responses to secondary lymphoid chemokines increase progressively during B cell differentiation in the BM and are upregulated even further in cells that have progressed into fully mature recirculating peripheral B cells. The remarkable similarity in chemotactic responses to the peripheral chemokines by different mature peripheral B cell subsets (follicular, MZ, GC, and B1 B cells) was unexpected in light of their unique patterns of microenvironmental homing. The only exception was the response to MIP-3␣, which was mainly detected in follicleassociated ␦ ϩ and GC B cells. We conclude that these chemokines and their receptors likely act in combination with other chemoattractants, signaling, and adhesion molecules to control the microenvironmental homing and the localization of distinct B cell subsets in the periphery. In contrast to the similar chemotactic fingerprints of microenvironmentally defined peripheral B cell populations, developing BM B cells display striking, stage-specific chemokine response profiles. The dramatic switches in chemokine responses in maturing B cells suggest that chemoattractant responsiveness may play an important role in B cell development.
The effect of digitalis and ammonia on such intermediary metabolism was, therefore, also studied.
1. Preparation of the isolated heart In a guinea pig, approximately 250Gm. of body weight, the tip of the reservoir chamber described below was inserted into the lumen of the left auricle and fixed, under artificial respiration, according to the method described by Clarke.4) The aorta and the pulmonary artery were then ligated, and the heart was separated from the surrounding tissue.
The experimental apparatus is shown in Fig.1 tion into the myocardial protein was also noted in cases after addition of ammonia (Table III, IV) . addition of digitalis. In the free amino acid fractions in the myocardium, radioactivity was noted in glutamic acid, N3 fraction, and alanine. In addition of ammonia, transition to glutamic acid and N3 fraction was rather pronounced. In the free amino acid fractions in plasma of the perfused blood, radioactivity was noted in the glutamic acid and alanine. No definite tendency was noted in the incorporation into myocardial protein (Table VII, VIII) . 4 . Experiment of glutamic acid-1-C14 administration C14O2 production averaged 384 CPM/gww upon perfusion for 15 min. 6. Experiment with administration of glycine-1-C14 C14O2 production was 91 CPM/gww in the case of perfusion for 35 min. and 332 CPM/gww in the case of perfusion for 60 min. The radioactivity of the myocardial non-protein components was 632 x 103 CPM after 35 min. and 1,300 X 103 CPM after 60 min., indicating an increase of uptake in the myocardium in the course of time. In the myocardial free amino acid fractions, radioactivity was noted in aspartic acid and glutamic acid. In the plasma of the perfused blood, radioactivity was noted in aspartic acid and N1 fraction. The incorporation into the myocardial protein was 114 CPM after 35 min. and increased to 465 CPM after 60 min. (Table XIII , XIV).
7. Experiment with glutamine-C14 (U) administration C14O2 production averaged 1,356 CPM/gww after 1 min. perfusion, 1,648 CPM/gww after 3 min., 1,630 CPM/gww after 8 min. and 1,656 CPM/gww after 30 min. These results suggest a rather early combustion of glutamine.
In Fig. 3 . Radioactivity of respiratory 0140,.
(
Pyruvate-3-C14 (3A) Pyruvate-3-C74+Ammonia (3D) Pyruvate-3-C14+Digitalis (4)
Glutamic acid-l-C14 (5) Alanine-l-C74 (6) Glycine-l-C14 (7) Glutamine-C14(U) (7D) Glutamine-C14(U)+Digitalis (Isotopes value; 5 µc.) course of time, no radioactivity was noted at all in the group of digitalis administration (Table XV, XVI) . Fig.3, 4 and 5 illustrate the summary of the results described above. Jap. Heart J. July, 1968 Concerning the C14O2 production from C14-glutamic acid , Clark4) estimated the rate of 0.5% in the guinea pig heart . Doell and Felts11) observed that the glutamic acid administered into the perfused rabbit heart disappeared rapidly and 48% of the administered radioactivity was removed from the perfused fluid and 22% was oxidized into C14O2 after 1 hour . The amount of production of C14O2 from C14-glutamic acid in the author's experiment was lower than from acetate-1-C14 and pyruvate-1-C14, but indicating the utilization of glutamic acid as the energy source to some extent. As to the incorporation of glutamic acid into protein, Nyhan and Busch11) injected L-glutamic acid-C14(U) into rats and observed the incorporation of isotope into various organs, tode monstrate less than 5% of the administered isotope in cardiac muscle protein.
In the author's results the incorporation into protein was hardly noted. Concerning the relationship between glutamic acid and other amino acids, Awapara31) observed the formation of equivalent aspartic acid following glutamic acid administration in the rat myocardial homogenate. In the heart-lung preparation of guinea pig, Matsubara13) found radioactivity in aspartic acid, alanine, N3 and B2 fractions besides added glutamic acid after the administration of C14-glutamic acid (generally labelled). In the author's results, aspartic acid and N3 fraction showed radioactivity besides added glutamic acid in the perfused blood plasma and myocardium. Considering together with the high GOT and GPT activities in the myocardium, the transamination reaction appears to play an important role in the amino acid metabolism of the myocardium, and glutamic acid is probably changed into various amino acids in the myocardium. Since alanine is simply deaminized to change into pyruvate, it is supposed to play the role of the bridge between protein and carbohydrate. Lusk et al. 32) and Green & Goldberger33) reported on the effect of alanine on carbohydrate metabolism. In the experiment using the heart-lung preparation of dogs, Taguchi4) observed that the decreases in the concentrations of pyruvate, lactate, and fatty acid in the perfusing blood were less following alanine administration than following glutamic acid administration, and suggested the liability of alanine to be used as energy source. Clarke1) calculated, in the guinea pig heart, the rate of C14O2, formation from alanine-1-C14 as 3.6%, which was greater than that from glutamic acid. This would also indicate the liability of alanine to be used fuel. According to the authors results, C14O2 production was smaller than from glutamic acid. However, the demonstration of radioactivity in the ninhydrin negative fraction, which was supposed to represent pyruvate, in the perfusing blood might also indicate the transition of alanine to carbohydrate.
Lorber and Olsen34) administered C13-carboxyl labelled glycine into the 
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is an autosomaldominantly inherited, late-onset neurodegenerative disease primarily affecting the cerebellar cortex and brainstem. Affected patients suffer from disturbed motor coordination, slurred speech, dysphagia, spasticity, extrapyramidal movements such as dystonia or chorea, cerebellar oculomotor disturbances and ophthalmoparesis, saccade slowing and -at late disease stage -cognitive impairment [1] . A gain-of-function toxicity of the ataxin 1 protein was identified as the main causative agent in SCA1: In the ATXN1 gene on chromosome 6p23 a CAG-repeat expansion of variable length reaching between 39 and 83 repeats encodes for a prolonged polyglutamine chain in ataxin1 protein [2] . The physiologic function of ataxin1 is barely understood [3] . Subsequent nuclear and cytosolic protein aggregation in cerebellar Purkinje cells and brainstem neurons finally leads to cell death. Patients with longer CAG repeat tend to have an earlier disease onset and a faster progression than patients with short repeat expansions, causing great variations in disease severity even within families [1] .
Historically the classification of spinocerebellar ataxias has been directed by additional extracerebellar sign presence (autosomal dominant ataxia type I, ADCA I) or absence (ADCAIII), with cerebellar ataxia plus retinal degeneration being termed ADCA II [4] . Since genetic testing became available, at least 30 spinocerebellar ataxia subtypes have been identified with different gene localisation. SCA1 belongs to ADCA I group without known retinal involvement, whereas in SCA7 (ADCA II) degeneration of macula or retina is well established [5] [6] . In SCA1 patients, however, some groups found ophthalmologic pathology besides well described cerebellar oculomotor abnormalities: Visual acuity reduction with color vision failure and visual field contraction are reported. Some case collections suggest an increase of these symptoms with disease duration [7] [8], but do not find prominent changes at disease onset [8] . Electroretinogram (ERG) is reported to show mild attenuation of oscillatory potentials and corneal endothelial cell density was reported decreased [8] . The reduced visual acuity in SCA1 has been attributed to optic atrophy, which was first described by fundus examination [8] . Optic nerve involvement was also suggested by a significant percentage of VEP abnormalities in SCA1 patients [9] [10] . However in these studies 40-50% of SCA1 patients did not show VEP alteration and earlier neuro-pathologic work could not establish retinal or optic nerve pathology in SCA1 [11] . In summary, descriptions on retinal and optic nerve changes in SCA1 are controversial and no data exists on retinal pathology using high resolution OCT so far.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a modern non-invasive method for high-resolution retinal investigations. The recently developed spectral domain technique allows spatial resolution down to 3 mm when measuring retinal nerve fiber layer thickness (RNFLT), which has previously only been possible with histopathology and ranges far above MRI resolution [12] . OCT has become a powerful tool in ophthalmologic diagnostics of diseases affecting retinal tissue e.g. glaucoma [12] or multiple sclerosis [13] [14] . Since it allows unique morphologic characterization of neuronal cells belonging to the CNS, the method is currently explored for diagnosis and monitoring of disease progression in a variety of neurodegenerative disorders as a surrogate parameter for cerebral and/or optic nerve axonal loss [15] [16] [17] .
Due to its simple application even in severely handicapped individuals the method is well suited for examination of ataxia patients. It has so far been applied in SCA7, where a significant reduction in RNFLT in all quadrants sparing the temporal one is consistently found [6] [5] . To the best of our knowledge in other forms of SCA no systematic study of retinal involvement using OCT has been performed so far.
Against this background, we set out to examine individuals with genetically proven SCA1 compared to age-and-gender matched healthy controls with OCT and VEP for retinal and optic nerve involvement.

The study was approved by the institutional ethics committee and all participants gave informed written consent.
To evaluate retinal changes in SCA1 patients compared to age and gender matched healthy controls.
Patients were recruited from the ataxia outpatient clinic of the Charité university hospital in Berlin from December 2009 to January 2011. Inclusion criteria were a genetically diagnosed SCA1 and age ranging from 18 to 75 years. Healthy controls were matched by gender and age with a tolerance of 63 years. Participants with known pre-existing ophthalmological diseases were excluded.
If available, patients provided data of the number of CAG repeats in the ATXN1 gene, which were genetically ascertained by external laboratories. The disease duration was defined as the time (in years) since the first symptom appeared. Visual Acuity (VA) was assessed using Snellen Charts and refractive error (REF) was estimated using the Heidelberg Spectralis integrated confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope (SLO).
The SARA score was used for assessment and rating of patients' ataxia [18] . Briefly, the test assesses the following functions: gait, stance, sitting, speech disturbance, finger chase, nose-finger test, fast alternating hand movements and heel-shin slide. A summary score of these functional items gives the final SARA score, with a range from 0 (no ataxia) to 40 (most severe ataxia).
A spectral domain OCT device (Heidelberg Spectralis SD-OCT, Heidelberg Engineering, Germany, Spectralis software version 5.2.4.0, Eye Explorer Software 1.6.2.0) was used to measure the RNFLT and the total macular volume (TMV). For RNFLT, three 3.4 mm circular scans were acquired using the standard protocol and the scan with the highest quality value was chosen (in case of equal quality, an arbitrary scan was taken). The thickness between the inner limiting membrane and the retinal nerve fiber layer was calculated by the device software's segmentation algorithm. As parameters we used the average RNFLT of the full circle scan (G) and the partition of the circle in the following sectors: nasal-superior (NS), nasal (N), nasal-inferior (NI), temporal-inferior (TI), temporal (T) and temporal-superior (TS). The partition is visualized in figure 1C .
For the analysis of further retinal tissue layers, the program OCTseg [19] was used for automatic layer segmentation. Each segmentation result was manually corrected in a blinded fashion and the exported segmentation lines were used to calculate the thicknesses of the following layers: ganglion cell layer (GCL) and inner plexiform layer (IPL), inner nuclear layer (INL) and outer plexiform layer (OPL), outer nuclear layer (ONL) and photoreceptor layer (PRL) and the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) (figure 2A). The RNFL segmentation of OCTseg confirmed the previous results.
The TMV was appointed by a custom protocol which generated 61 slices (B-scans) focusing the fovea centralis with a scanning angle of 30u625u and a resolution of 768 A-scans per B-scan. Some patients were not able to focus the fixation point during examination due to strong eye and head movement. TMV was calculated by estimating the distance between the inner limiting membrane and the Bruch-membrane in a cylinder with 6mm in diameter using the device software's segmentation algorithm.
All measurements were performed by one of three experienced operators. The computationally generated segmentation lines were reviewed by the operators and manually corrected in cases of errors.
VEPs were recorded from Oz electrode against a Cz reference electrode following checkerboard stimulation. Between 40 and 80 recordings were averaged twice until clear peaks became visible. The latencies of the P100 peaks were used for analysis. Responses of P100 above 119 ms were defined as abnormal.
A Mann-Whitney U-test was used to identify statistical differences of age between the study cohorts. Spearman's Rho tests were used for cross-correlation analysis of the clinical parameters (SARA score, disease duration and number of repeats) within the SCA1 cohort.
Statistical differences between SCA1 patients and the group of healthy controls were calculated using General Estimation Equation (GEE) models to account for within-subject inter-eye dependencies. The multiple tests of all sectors from all retinal layers were adjusted using Bonferroni-Holm Correction. Correlation analysis of a clinical parameter (SARA score, disease duration and visual acuity) to the OCT data (RNFLT and macular volumes) were equally performed with GEE. In all GEEs, OCT measurements were included as the dependent variable.
All statistical analyses and graphical representations were performed with R (R version 2.12.1) including the packages geepack for calculating GEE, psych, Hmisc for basic statistics and plotrix and gplots for graphic generation. All results from R were validated using SPSS 18 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Graphical presentations were prepared using Adobe Illustrator CS5 (Adobe Systems, Munich, Germany).

In this study, we included nine patients with a genetically diagnosed SCA1 and compared them to a gender-and agematched cohort of nine healthy controls. Demographic parameters of the investigated cohorts and the clinical results of the SARA score, VEP, visual acuity, refractive error and the number of repeats in the polyglutamine trace of the ATXN1 alleles are summarized in table 1. Due to the small sample size and the pilot character of this study, an additional overview with single patient profiles is given in table 2. The difference in age between the groups was not significant (Mann-Whitney U test, p = 0.93).
SARA scores for SCA1 patients ranged from 5 to 28 with a median of 15 and the mean disease duration was 13.1 years, ranging from 3 to 30 years. A general tendency towards higher SARA scores for longer disease duration was visible (figure 3A) but did not reach a significant level for the correlation (Spearman's Rho = 0.64, p = 0.061). Seven SCA1 patients provided trinucleotide repeat numbers of the glutamine encoding part of the diseased ATXN1 allele (mean = 48.1, SD = 2.9) and, in addition, six of the patients could provide the repeat numbers of the unaffected allele (mean = 30.7, SD = 1.8).
Refractive error of patients (mean = 20.68D, SD = 1.33D, Range = 22.90 -1.84D) and healthy controls (mean = 0.19D, SD = 1.50D, Range = 21.67 -3.95D) did not differ significantly (GEE: p = 0.20). One patient and the corresponding healthy control had to be excluded due to high refractive error.
The visual acuity of SCA1 patients (mean = 0.54, SD = 0.32) was significantly reduced (GEE: p = 0.003) compared to healthy controls (0.86, SD = 0.17).
All study subjects (n = 18) underwent an OCT examination for both eyes (36 eyes). For RNFLT, two eyes from SCA1 patients were excluded from further analysis: one right eye due to bad image quality and one left eye due to blindness (post operation of eye tumor). RNFLT was separated as depicted in figure 1C . The total average RNFLT (G) of SCA1 patients was significantly reduced compared to healthy controls (84.0612.7 mm vs. 97.267.7 mm, GEE: p = 0.004). RNFL thinning was predominant and significant in temporal sectors (TS: p = 0.005, T: p,0.001, TI: p,0.001) and was not found in nasal sectors (NS: p = 0.480, N: figure 1A) . The most pronounced thinning was found in the temporal-inferior and temporal sectors. When comparing the complete RNFLT profile of both study cohorts (figure 1B), the regional degeneration of the temporal retinal nerve fiber layer became apparent.
The Spectralis device provided a normative database that was used to compare the individual results of the RNFLT sectors to a large cohort of healthy controls. RNFL thickness below 5% of the normative database controls was colored in yellow, while sectors in red indicated values in the 1%-percentile. The normal range of RNFLT values was defined as the 95%-percentile and was colored in green ( figure 1C gives an example). Two patients did not have any sectors below the 5%-border while the rest exhibited at least one sector below the normal range. Three patients showed RNFLT values below 1% of the normative database for one or more sectors. Table 3 summarized the occurrence of classifications for the different sectors. In contrast, only a single sector of one healthy control was in the 5%-percentile.
The mean thickness profiles of the additional retinal layers for both study cohorts are shown in figure 2B . None of the additional layers revealed apparent differences between the groups. When averaging all layer profiles in sectors (data not shown), only the thickness of the NS sector of the ganglion cell and inner plexiform layer showed a reduction in SCA1 patients (GEE: p = 0.001).
Some patients with a distinct nystagmus or uncontrolled head movements were not able to complete the more demanding macular volume scans. Therefore, only 11 eyes of the SCA1 cohort could be analyzed. One TMV measurement of a healthy control had to be excluded due to an erroneous scan. Thus, only the related subjects from the matched group of healthy controls were considered for the cohort comparison. SCA1 patients showed a not significant reduction of the TMV (SCA1: mean = 8. 
For 11 eyes from 6 SCA1 patients VEPs could be acquired in sufficient quality and compared to VEPs of the corresponding healthy controls. None of the participants showed a pathologic increase in latency of the P100 peak and no significant difference between the cohorts was detected (SCA1: mean = 102.9 ms (SD = 5.6 ms) vs. HC: mean = 102.4 ms (SD = 3.3 ms), GEE: p = 0.69).
Correlation of RNFLT with disease duration,SARA score and visual acuity Next, OCT findings were correlated with disease duration and disease severity measured by SARA score. When comparing RNFLT (G) with SARA score and disease duration, GEEs for both were not significant (SARA: p = 0.073, duration: p = 0.098). Scatter plots of RNFLT with SARA score and disease duration are given in figures 3B and 3C, respectively, proposing a possible trend for a correlation of RNFLT with SARA score. Figure 3D show the correlation of the visual acuity with RNFLT (G) for SCA1 patients (red) and healthy controls (blue) with no significant correlations between the combined cohorts (GEE: p = 0.46).
This is the first study investigating retinal involvement in SCA1 patients using optical coherence tomography. We found a pattern of temporal atrophy of the retinal nerve fiber layer in most patients. Layer segmentation analysis confirmed temporal RNFLT reduction whereas no significant differences were seen in average of ganglion cell layer, inner and outer plexiform layer, photoreceptor layer and pigment epithelium. In sector analysis of layers only the NS sector of the ganglion cell and inner plexiform layer showed a reduction in SCA1 patients. Two patients (table 2, cases 6 and 8) displayed no significant RNFLT changes. The patient with longest disease duration (30 years; table 2, case no. 2) and highest SARA score (28) showed additional severe macular atrophy. However, in this patient RNFLT reduction was very prominent, indicating that in late stage disease nerve fiber atrophy could lead to ganglion cell degeneration and consecutively to macular volume reduction. Although a reduction of retinal nerve fiber layer thickness was not present in each individual SCA1 patient, a correlation trend of RNFLT with disease duration and severity was seen. In contrast to OCT, VEP P100 latencies were not able to detect changes in our patients. However, since VEP amplitudes correlate better with axonal loss but were not analyzable in our small sample size due to high inter-and intrasubject variability, we might have missed a significant difference, which might be shown in a larger cohort. Strengths of the study are the prospective design, the matched control group and the use of spectral domain OCT with layer segmentation analysis. The used OCT device provides an eye tracking function that registers OCT scans to a fundus image and thereby reduces the effects of eye movement during scans. This function makes the application of OCT examination and especially of 3D volume scans possible for patients with severe head ataxia or eye movement abnormalities. However, in several patients this correction was not sufficient, leading to missing scans in the demanding macular volume scans. Another weakness of the study is the low sample size which is owed to the rarity of the disease and the severe disability of many patients. Most likely this contributed to not significant changes to macular volumes and correlations to SARA score or disease duration.
Interestingly, the consistent pattern of selective temporal RNFLT reduction in our study prompts the question of pathophysiologic relevance. One explanation could be that RNFLT analysis enables early detection of incipient optic atrophy in SCA1 since a temporal emphasis of RNFLT reduction is found in a variety of diseases associated with optic nerve atrophy. These conditions comprise post neuritic optic atrophy in multiple sclerosis [16] [20], hereditary optic atrophies such as dominant optic atrophy (DOA) and Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) and toxic optic atrophies. However VEP did not detect optic atrophy in our study with all the drawbacks discussed above. But also previous studies using VEP did not find optic nerve involvement to such an extent as our results would suggest [9] [10] .
Selective temporal RNFLT involvement could be explained pathophysiologically by a differential vulnerability of retinal axons to mutated ataxin1.The temporal quadrant of the retinal nerve fiber layer is built primarily by parvo-cellular axons from the papillo-macular bundle. These fibers consist of smaller, thinly myelinated axons with rapid firing rates which serve the visual functions of high resolution visual acuity, color vision and high spatial frequency of contrast sensitivity. On the other hand, magno-cellular ganglion cell axons and photoreceptors which are both distributed evenly throughout the retina seem relatively unaffected from damage. Magno-cellular ganglion cells have thicker axons with lower firing rate and serve low-spatialfrequency contrast sensitivity and motion stereopsis.
Other diseases with primary involvement of parvocellular axons comprise the so called non-syndromic mitochondrial optic neuropathies such as Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) and OPA1 related dominant optic nerve atrophy (DOA) and toxic and nutritional optic neuropathies such as tobacco-alcohol amblyopia or ethambutol-induced optic neuropathy [21] .
As common etiologic pathway of such disparate diseases the disruption of mechanisms participating in the correction of oxidative stress with primary insult to mitochondria is discussed [21] [22] . Due to their small volume and fast firing response, parvo-cellular axons may be more susceptible to energy depletion by defective oxidative phosphorylation resulting from vitamin depletion or mutations affecting mitochondrial function.
In SCA1, nuclear and cytosolic protein aggregates are associated with neurodegeneration of cerebellar Purkinje neurons. Although many protein interaction partners of ataxin1 have been RNFLT results were obtained from 9 SCA1 and compared to 9 age/sex matched healthy controls (HC). 2 eyes of SCA1 patients had to be excluded, one left eye due to blindness and one right eye because of errors in the OCT image. In total, 11 eyes of SCA1 patients fulfilled quality criteria for the TMV scan and were compared to the corresponding eyes of the matching healthy controls. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0023024.t004
identified and its impact on transcriptional dysregulation has been stated, the clear pathophysiologic processes leading to cell death remain to be elucidated [3] . Few hints point towards impeded antioxidant mechanisms such as reduced Cu/ZnSOD dismutase activity with subsequent accumulation of reactive oxygen species in the disease process [23] . Hypothetically the patchy pattern of temporal RNFLT reduction seen in our patients could be caused by localised breakdown of oxidative defense mechanisms.
In terms of retinal damage other previously examined ataxia disorders such as Friedreich's ataxia and neuropathy ataxia retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) belonging to the group of syndromic mitochondriopathies present with more general retinal thinning [24] [25] . One explanation could be the disruption of complex I, II and III as compared to only complex I in the non-syndromic mitochondrial neuropathies [22] . However, the role of respiratory chain complexes in SCA1 is not clear yet.
In SCA7, along with a peripheral RNFLT reduction even a sparing of the temporal sector has been observed in RNFLT measurements resembling the pattern in other retinal dystrophies such as retinitis pigmentosa [26] . Key to understanding the complementary findings could be the diverse function of ataxin 1 and ataxin7. In SCA7 a pronounced retinal cone-rod dystrophy associated with visual loss is a characteristic feature especially in early disease stages. Additionally in late stage disease a maculopathy can evolve ('bull's eye' maculopathy) [27] . In transgenic mice it has been shown that ataxin 7 can suppress a cone-rod homebox protein transactivation in retinal photoreceptor cells thus controlling expression level of several photoreceptorspecific genes such as rhodopsin [28] . The relative sparing of the temporal sector has been discussed as possible result of the relative sparing of the inner macula around the central fovea associated with normal ganglion cell layer thickness of the peripapillary temporal quadrant in earlier disease stage [6] .
These distinct patterns raise the question whether OCT may serve a purpose in differential diagnosis in ataxia disorders, a topic yet to be addressed by examination of larger patient cohorts composed of different ataxia disorders in direct comparison. Additionally larger studies should allow more precise layer segmentation analysis. A longitudinal study design could also serve to evaluate potential use of RNFLT as non invasive disease progression marker.
Regional centres and countries where health services are limited commonly need to provide care to critically ill patients in the absence of formal intensive care facilities and trained staff. In Australia and New Zealand, geographical isolation forces remote hospitals to be responsible for the care of a critically unwell patient for a significant period of time. It is therefore important that the staff, frequently inexperienced junior doctors, can sustain the patient until inter-hospital transfer occurs. In order to meet this need and the needs of junior doctors starting intensive care training, the Basic Assessment and Support in Intensive Care (BASIC) course was developed by a group of intensive care specialists in Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong and the United Kingdom. The majority of members of the international steering committee are Fellows of the Australian and New Zealand College of Intensive Care Medicine.
The aim of the program is to improve the standard of care delivered by non-intensive care specialist staff to the critically ill. BASIC is not an intensive care training program for specialist intensive care practice or a surrogate for an advanced training program in intensive care. Rather, it is aimed at junior medical staff who may be rotating through acute care specialties or starting intensive care training. It also aims to assist senior nursing staff, career medical officers, paramedical staff and consultants from non-critical care disciplines who require additional skills and knowledge in the management of the intensive care patient.
The first course was conducted in Hong Kong in 2004 and subsequent courses were run in Hawke's Bay, New Zealand and Brisbane, Queensland since 2005. BASIC courses have since been established in Bahrain, Cambodia, the Peoples Republic of China, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Israel, Korea, Kuwait, Malaysia, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Syria, United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom. In addition, a military version of BASIC has been run for the Australian Defence Force targeting medical, nursing and paramedical staff. The international steering committee oversees curriculum development, audit and research. There are no licence fees for use of course material and all courses are run on a notfor-profit basis. Tutors are not paid for their participation but travel expenses can be met where required. Ongoing development has been partially funded by unrestricted educational grants from Dräger Medical and Maquet. There was no company involvement in the development of the course content or teaching resources.
Each tutor is required to attend an entire BASIC course and to complete an instructor program whereby the philosophy behind BASIC is described, along with specific instruction in the principles of lecturing and small group teaching. In addition, the instructor program uses senior tutors experienced in BASIC to critique a concise version of lectures and skills stations which will be taught in a subsequent course by new tutors. Each tutor is provided with the participant evaluation of the course, including the specific assessment of their particular teaching sessions as well as the performance of all sessions. Specific participant comments are also made available, as well as participant performance in the pre-and post-course examination. Each course's program director has been approved by the BASIC Steering Committee. The course program director is responsible for ensuring that tutors have completed training and for the maintenance of the educational standards of the teaching faculty and keeping the program to time. A minimum faculty of six is required to run the course.
BASIC is a course conducted with the intention that in a relatively short time period, candidates are trained to identify the need for and provide initial support to the critically ill patient. The course has a particular emphasis on cardiorespiratory pathophysiology, mechanical ventilation, renal failure, neurological emergencies, severe sepsis, trauma and patient transport. Important concepts in nutrition, deep vein thrombosis and stress ulcer prophylaxis are also considered providing a knowledge base with respect to daily intensive care routines. Clinical reasoning and problem-solving skills in relation to interpretation of arterial blood gases and electrolytes are also developed. Advanced life support skills including cardiopulmonary resuscitation and defibrillation, airway support, intubation, vascular access and patient transport are reviewed in dedicated skill stations with special emphasis placed on mechanical ventilation.
Multiple teaching methods are employed. Precourse self-directed learning is essential, being facilitated by the provision of written and electronic resources at least four weeks prior to the course commencement. The breadth of the required learning was illustrated by performance on the pre-course web-based multiple choice examination. Access to pre-course examination was made available when course materials were delivered. The workshop, run over two to three days, consists of short lectures (20 to 30 minutes), practical skill stations (30 to 40 minutes), low fidelity simulations as well as small group interactive scenario-based sessions. Course lectures use a single tutor while the maximal number of course participants per tutor in the skill stations is six. The course teaching material does not rely on high fidelity simulation and therefore can be conducted in most hospitals with standard educational facilities. The participants have a summative assessment by a multiple choice exam which is case scenario based and emphasises clinical decision making. Participants evaluate the course using an objective survey tool.
The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the success of the BASIC course in improving specific assessable knowledge and satisfaction of participant expectations in Australia and New Zealand.
The BASIC courses from Brisbane, Queensland and Hawke's Bay, New Zealand were assessed to define the early Australasian experience from 2005 until mid 2009. Both courses use local faculty comprising specialist intensivists, specialist emergency physicians, anaesthetists or senior registrars in intensive care. In order to maintain diversity, interstate national and international instructors are often invited.
Since November 2006 the Brisbane BASIC course has included five integrated advanced simulation scenarios. Consequently the contact period was extended to three days.
From implementation of the BASIC course in Australia and New Zealand, a database of participant performance was collated. This database was used to analyse the participants' demographics and the results of pre-and post-course examinations. The data collected from participant feedback was not collected similarly. As such, only the Brisbane data is presented.
A pre-course online 'open book' formative assessment of 41 multiple choice questions and a post-course "closed-book" summative assessment of 30 multiple choice exam questions were used to assess clinical skills developed though the course. The pre-course examination comprised factual questions with simple clinical scenarios while the final examination only used acute clinical scenarios which emphasised clinical decision making and investigation interpretation. The exams were developed and reviewed by the steering committee of BASIC with referencing back to course materials. Exams were also reviewed by local program directors for applicability in each country with minor changes made for local drug availability and resources.
The post-course exam results were analysed comparing the Brisbane and Hawke's Bay programs. Demographic data, course program and pre-course exam performance were assessed for their ability to predict final exam mark.
Participant feedback was acquired through a survey at the completion of the course using structured responses from five-point Likert scales for each component of the course as well as the overall conduct of the course. Unstructured free comments were also elicited.
Data was analysed using paired t-tests and KruskalWallis for continuous data. Categorical data was assessed using chi-squared or Fisher's exact test where analysis assumptions were met. The final exam score was analysed using forward multiple regression modelling with the model assessed for normal distribution, linearity and homoscedasticity.
Since Tables 2 and 3 . The pre-course open book examination result averaged 79% (95% confidence interval [CI] 78 to 80) and the post-course closed book exam was 64% (95% CI 63 to 65). A score of less than 50% was made by 16 participants (2.3%) on the pre-course examination and 127 (16%) on the post course examination. One hundred and sixteen participants failed to submit the precourse test and were excluded from the pre-course failure rate analysis.
Univariate and multivariate regression analysis were used to establish the predictors of post-course examination results (Table 4 ). The pre-course test result and the opportunity to perform advanced simulations positively predicted examination performance. Nursing staff examination results were lower than other participants. The model predicted 38% of the variance in post-course results and the assumptions of normality, homoscedasticity and linearity were met. However, there were few important differences between the final exam performance between participants in Brisbane and Hawke's Bay. The structured component assessment was made using a five-point Likert scale representing satisfaction, greatest at 5, and dissatisfaction, at worst, scoring 1 (Figures 1 and 2) . Both lectures and skill stations performed well in terms of participant satisfaction (Figures 1 and 2 General comments about the course conduct and content was assessed on a Likert scale with agreement with a given statement being least at 1 and greatest at 5 (Figure 3) . Candidate consensus opinion is in support of the course in its current format with respect to both content and conduct (Figure 3) . Importantly, all participants believed the course to be beneficial and that the general level of the program was correct. There was candidate ambivalence with regard to the amount of course material and the balance between practical and didactic sessions. The themes and general responses in the Hawke's Bay cohort were similar. Free comments were reviewed and important themes extracted. Of 205 written comments received, gratitude for the course quality was expressed (53%) but there was disappointment at the limited time for the acquisition of "such critical skills and knowledge" (40%). Requests for separate targeted lectures for nurses (5 from 15 nurses attending) were infrequent, but highlight a real or perceived learning style difference. This request for separation was reversed in the simulation environment, where nurses consistently wanted to be integrated into realistic emergency response teams or teams derived from the same originating hospital.
Critical care skills are not broadly available to a geographically disseminated population 1 . As such, local health practitioners may be required to provide initial support for such patients until transfer can be organised to a definitive care facility. In addition, new medical graduates are increasingly recognised as needing critical care skills upon graduation 2 . Consequently there has been an increase in the number of courses available to meet this need. This paper describes the outcomes of the BASIC course in Brisbane and Hawke's Bay. The program was designed to provide training to clinicians who infrequently needed to provide care to the critically ill. BASIC met this aim with 58% of participants attending from regional or rural areas. The course was generally well received with participants believing it should continue to be available. The end of course exam score was not improved compared to the pre-course exam. The failure rate was also higher in the end of course exam. However, the preand post-course examinations are not comparable. The pre-course exam tests individual pieces of knowledge in an open-book format designed to stimulate the participant to go to the manual and find the answer, raise awareness of deficiencies and in the process encourage reading of the pre-course material. The post-course exam is a summative assessment, designed to test correct application of knowledge and concepts taught. The pre-course exam predicts post-course exam results. This may reflect better preparation or motivation. Locally, we have had a similar experience with the results of the Society for Critical Care Medicine course. Here the difference between the pre-and post-exam in 271 participants completing 13 courses was only 3%, with 49% of participants worsening their scores and the proportion with less than 50% increasing from 1% to 3% (Ross Freebairn unpublished data). Performance on the final paper does vary internationally; Africa (n=24, mean 65% range 27 to 87%), East Asia (n=1494, mean 58% range 3 to 97%), Europe (n=291, mean 65% range 27 to 90%), Oceania (n=1481, mean 64% range 23 to 100%) and West Asia (n=276, mean 52% range 20 to 90%.
Importantly, the majority of the participants felt they had learned a great deal from the course. The pitch of the content and the amount of material was judged to be appropriate. Participants believed the amount of didactic teaching was appropriate despite 14 lectures in the program. The increase in the course duration to three days reduced the feedback of that insufficient time had been provided for training.
The BASIC course was not designed to achieve clinical competency as an intensive care specialist or in crisis resource management. Rather, its aim is to provide an opportunity for specific learning in the principles of critical care management for those practitioners new to the area or required to provide this type of support infrequently. The assessment of understanding of the material was achieved using a multiple choice examination. Such a format was used to provide an efficient standardised approach for assessment across many countries, where both teaching and assessment resources are often limited. The questions are scenario-based and emphasise common clinical decisions that need to be regularly made in the early management of the clinically ill. Skill stations represent an initial phase of learning in a safe environment with many opportunities for revision and reinforcement.
Our analysis reveals the performance of participants in the BASIC course. Ideally, longer term assessment of knowledge retention would be useful. While such assessments are planned for future study, resuscitation courses predominantly targeting basic and advanced life support generally find significant skill deterioration within six months unless some form of refresher program is available [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] . This is especially so for practitioners where such need for resuscitation skills are not part of their routine clinical practice 9 . Importantly, the skills taught in BASIC are more complex and wide-ranging compared to a conventional advanced cardiac life support or cardiopulmonary resuscitation course. Knowledge of the BASIC course performance is critical in facilitating program improvement such that the quality of clinical decisions in diagnosis and treatment is enhanced following course attendance.
BASIC is still evolving as a program. The clinical scenarios of the present pre-and post-course examinations were written by experienced tertiary educators with long experience of intensive care trainees from many disciplines and levels. BASIC courses continue to be assessed for the optimal teaching and assessment tools suitable for a short course and the inexperienced trainee or practitioner. A difficult question is where to set the passing grade or indeed whether such courses can truly grade competence 10 . Choosing a passing grade is a policy decision which must withstand stakeholder scrutiny. Such scores generally are based upon either qualified expert opinion of the level of knowledge and skill necessary to be demonstrated by participants as well as the skill composition of the passing cohort based upon a particular passing grade. As such there can be no perfectly selected passing score and the setting of the standard will always be controversial 11 . For the BASIC multiple choice written examination, a large body of data is now available to review the performance of questions for their ability to assess objective knowledge as well as decision making for paper-based clinical scenarios. This is the subject of further study along with the longer term utility of the program for skills maintenance.
It is important to consider whether an assessment is to be formative with the aim to drive further learning or summative for the accomplishment of a minimal skill set. Short courses always have the problem of ensuring any degree of competence, especially where the range of skills is broad. Time is generally insufficient for the repeated practice required to acquire the appropriate skills. The final examination scores are not dissimilar to those commonly achieved in generic clinical examinations, a target passing score is relatively easy to arbitrarily set. An example may be an 80% overall passing score and 100% performance on key marker questions perhaps with a formal weighting of the remaining questions based upon a grading of the essential need for the knowledge or decision making. As such the questions are developed to ensure this occurs for the average participant. Such passing score standards must be acceptable and defensible while ensuring that the passing score reflects acceptable levels of knowledge, skill and ability. The latter is very difficult to accomplish in a short two-to three-day course especially where the precourse preparation by the trainees can be exceedingly variable and there are differing expectations of the proportion of time for student-driven as opposed to tutor-driven teaching. The importance of preparation for the course by participants is manifest by the association between completion to the pre-course assessment, and improved performance in the final examination. This allows for greater targeted study to the level of understanding required and to focus the participants on areas requiring greater attention and explanation during the course. Information on the expected time to adequately complete the course materials and perhaps advertising of a 'passing' score prior to the course may be a useful learning driver. Simulation perhaps allows the opportunity to contextualise the knowledge.
BASIC courses utilise adult learning techniques and varied teaching formats to encourage candidate participation 12 , while reinforcement of factual content with practical application in skills stations encourages effective learning 13 . The assimilation of new information is more complex, but still achievable when the participants are from diverse clinical backgrounds 9 . Despite the unanimous support for the lectures, the feedback was significantly varied between courses in those topics traditionally known to be conceptually difficult such as arterial blood gas analysis, or unexciting, like electrolyte disturbances. In these areas attention to delivery format is important to ensure a successful program.
Cohorting of occupational groups for small group teaching may be advantageous given the differences in final examination results 14 . Such cohorting allows use of preferred teaching styles of particular craft groups. For small group skill stations such cohorting is commonly practised in BASIC. However, mixing groups, particularly in team clinical practice sessions such as cardiopulmonary resuscitation and clinical simulations, allows participants to practice together with improvement of teamwork skills within a multidisciplinary intensive care unit team 15 . Such a complex curriculum and diverse participant background requires tutors to be trained in the principles of small group teaching and lecturing and have an understanding of how the overall course is integrated. Ongoing supervision and feedback of teaching performance has been shown to improve the quality of teaching 16 and BASIC employs this strategy. An opportunity for simulation training can improve proficiency to allow participants to perform or assist in the conduct of critical care interventions appropriate to their occupational craft group 17 . The incorporation of simulation-based training in the Brisbane BASIC course correlated with improved final test outcomes. However, the reason for this is not entirely clear. Perhaps the availability of high fidelity simulation resulted in the self-selection of those participants who were more highly committed to success on the course. It is also possible that the stress of simulation training which includes realistic scenarios with peer-review based assessment is a stronger motivator for exam performance. Alternatively this form of assessment may influence the instructors such that they are more focused on the necessary outcomes, as compared with more traditional instructional modalities.
The BASIC course aims to provide an approach to the management of the critically ill by enhancing core knowledge, improving team work and inspiring confidence and enthusiasm in intensive care medicine. This review of the BASIC course as taught in Australia and New Zealand documents our experience of a course found to be a positive learning experience for participants in managing critical care patients.
. By mimicking the human cell-surface glycosylation in the stomach they act as molecular decoys for the immune system and therefore contribute to the persistence of the infection [9, 10] . Another feature of some H. pylori strains is the presence of an additional chain of d-glycerod-manno-heptose (dd-Hep), which has been reported to connect the O-chain to the LPS core [11] . Also, some LPS strains have been shown to express elongated a-glucan chains linked to the core [8, 12, 13] . LPS a-glucans can be either found O-6-linked [8, 12] [13] . Proof have also been presented for the expression of a highly branched cell-surface a-mannan composed of terminal, O-2-, O-6-, and O-2,6-substituted mannose (Man) residues [14] .
Cell-surface glycosylation is known to be involved in the control of various biologic and physiologic events such the modulation of protein conformational and functional properties [15, 16] , mediation of cell-cell adhesion and cell-host interaction [16, 17] , regulatory [16, 18] and immunologic [16, 19, 20] phenomena. Alteration of the cell-surface glycosylation patterns often occurs as a result of the adaptive responses to environmental changes comprising events such as the expression of capsular polysaccharides as well as excretion of polysaccharides to the surrounding media as exopolysaccharides [21] . These events are thought to confer extra protection against harsh environments and external aggressions. Production of exopolysaccharides is strongly correlated with the formation of biofilms responsible for the colonization of unfriendly environments and the promotion of bacterial life on community [22] .
In this work, we devote our attention to the identification and structural characterization of novel H. pylori cell-surface glycosides mainly produced as a result of environmental adaptation to growth in vitro solid and liquid media. Such insight can provide some enlightenment on the bacterial colonization strategies outside the human host, namely through the production of exopolysaccharides involved in the formation of biofilms or expression of capsular polysaccharides under very specific environmental conditions.

Reference strain H. pylori NCTC 11637 was obtained from the National Collection of Type Cultures (London, UK), clinical isolate 968 was provided by the Centre of Biological Engineering of the University of Minho (Braga, Portugal), and clinical isolate 14255 was provided by IPATIMUP (Porto, Portugal).
H. pylori cells were maintained as stock cultures in trypticase soy broth with 20% glycerol, recovered on prewarmed Gelose Columbia solid media supplemented with 5% horse blood (bioMé rieux, France) and incubated at 37°C for 72 hours, on a microaerophilic atmosphere generated by a CampyGen gas pack (Oxoid, Basingstoke, UK). Cells were subcultivated after 48-hour incubation periods in the conditions described before. The resulting biomass was harvested to sterile and filtered (0.22 lm) distilled water.
H. pylori reference strain NCTC 11637 and clinical isolate 968 were grown on Ham's F12 defined liquid media without the addition of enhancing growth factors. The medium was inoculated with cellular extracts obtained from Columbia blood agar (CBA) growth media. Cells were allowed to grow for 24 hours in a glass flask under microaerophilic atmosphere by gentile stirring at 37°C as described by Testerman et al. [6] .
Purity assessment was assured by using a highly specific peptide nucleic acid probe in a fluorescence in situ hybridization procedure, according to the protocol described by Guimaraes et al. [23] . For every experiment, a negative control was performed simultaneously where all the steps described before were carried out but where no probe was added during the hybridization procedure. Microscopy visualization was performed using an Olympus BX51 (OLYMPUS Portugal SA, Porto, Portugal) epifluorescence microscope equipped with one filter sensitive to the Alexa fluor 594 signaling molecule attached to the PNA probe (excitation 530-550 nm; barrier 570 nm; emission LP 591 nm).
Cell-surface glycans were isolated from cells using the hot phenol : water extraction according to Westphal and Jann [24] . The aqueous layer was dialyzed against distilled water using a 1000 Da cut-off membrane and lyophilized. The resulting material was fractioned by gel permeation ⁄ adsorption chromatography (GPC) on a polyacrylamide Bio-Gel P-6 (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) (0.6 m in length and 1.0 cm in diameter) column using distilled water as the eluting solvent at a constant flow rate of 0.33 mL ⁄ minute. The initial material (2.5 mg) was suspended in 400 lL of degassed distilled water and introduced in the column. Fractions of 2.8 mL were collected. The mass content in the fractions was estimated on evaporative light scattering detector SEDEX55 (SEDERE, Alfortville, France) and further assayed for total sugars with the phenol-H 2 SO 4 method [25] . Exclusion and total volume were calibrated with blue dextran and glucose, respectively.
Sugars composition analysis was performed by the alditol acetate method as described by Harris et al. [26] . The hydrolysis was done in 4 mol ⁄ L of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at 100°C for 3 hours, followed by reduction with NaBH 4 and subsequent acetylation with acetic anhydride in the presence of 1-methylimidazole. Alditol acetates derivatives were analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), performed in an Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA, USA) 6890N Network Gas Chromatograph connected to an Agilent 5973 Selective Mass Detector. The GC was equipped with a DB-1 capillary column (30 m in length, 0.32 mm in internal diameter, and 0.25 lm film thicknesses). The samples were injected in splitless mode (splitless time is 1.00 minute), with the injector and detector operating at 220 and 230°C, respectively, using the following temperature program: 100°C (1 minute) fi 150°C at 5°C ⁄ minute (8 minutes) fi 159°C at 0.5°C ⁄ minute (5 minutes) fi 250°C at 5°C ⁄ minute (2 minutes) fi 320°C at 2°C ⁄ minute (2 minutes). The carrier gas (He) had a flow of 1.7 mL ⁄ minute, with an average linear velocity of 47 cm ⁄ second, and a solvent delay of 9 minutes. The column head pressure was 5.34 psi. The mass spectrometer was operated in the electron impact mode at 70 eV, scanning the mass range m ⁄ z 40-500 and performing 3.18 scans per second.
Linkage analysis was carried out by methylation with NaOH ⁄ Me 2 SO ⁄ CH 3 I, as described by Ref. [27] . The methylated polysaccharides were hydrolyzed with 2 mol ⁄ L of TFA at 121°C for 1 hour, reduced by NaBD 4 , and acetylated with acetic anhydride in the presence of 1-methylimidazole. The partially methylated alditol acetates were analyzed by GC-MS using the chromatographic conditions previously described, using the following temperature program: 45°C (5 minutes) fi 140°C at 10°C ⁄ minute (5 minutes) fi 170°C at 0.5°C ⁄ minute (1 minute) fi 280°C at 15°C ⁄ minute (5 minutes).
A thin layer of fresh bacterial cells grown on solid medium was fixed on a cleaned sterile glass slide. Cells were then covered with Gram's iodine solution (0.33% (w ⁄ v) I 2 in 0.66% (w ⁄ v) KI aqueous solution; SigmaAldrich Química S.A., Sintra, Portugal) and incubated for 1 minute at room temperature. After incubation, the cells were washed with water to remove the excess of staining agent and observed by light microscopy.
Digestion with a-amylase from human saliva (Type IX-A, lyophilized powder, 1000-3000 units ⁄ mg protein; Sigma Aldrich) was performed in 50 mmol ⁄ L phosphate buffer at pH 6.8 for 3 hours at 20°C. The enzyme was denatured by heating the solution for 15 minutes at 100°C and the precipitate material was removed by centrifugation.
The enzyme-treated material was separated on a polyacrilamide Bio-Gel P-4 column (0.6 m in length and 1.0 cm in diameter) using water as an eluent in the conditions previously mentioned for the separation on the Bio-Gel P6 column.

H spectra were recorded on a Bruker (Bruker BioSpin GmbH, Rheinstetten, Germany) AMX 400 spectrometer at 295 K using standard Bruker software. Prior to performing the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments, the samples were lyophilized thrice with D 2 O (99.9%). The HDO peak was used as the internal reference at d H of 4.76 ppm.
MS assays were performed in a linear ion trap (LIT) electrospray (ESI) spectrometer in positive mode. Samples were dissolved in 1 : 200 of water : methanol and introduced into the MS at 10 lL ⁄ min. Typical ESI conditions were as follows: nitrogen sheath gas 30 psi, spray voltage 5.5 kV, heated capillary temperature 350°C, capillary voltage 1 V, and tube lens voltage 40 V. CollisionInduced Dissociation-Mass Spectrometry (CID-MS/MS) experiments were performed on mass-selected precursor ions using standard isolation and excitation procedures (activation q value of 0.25, activation time of 30 ms). The spectra were collected in the positive mode and collision energy used was 32 (arbitrary units). Data acquisition was carried out with Xcalibur data system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA).
Statistical significance was determined using paired Student's t-tests (p = .05). Between-and within-sample variances were determined by one-way ANOVA and comparison between standard deviations performed using an F-test (p = .05). Correlation between samples was determined by linear regression method.

In this study, H. pylori reference strain NCTC 11637 and clinical isolates 968 and 14255 were evaluated in relation to their cell-surface glycan profile. The first step in the identification and structural characterization of cell-surface polysaccharides comprised the recovery of glycan-rich aqueous phase resulting from hot phenol : water extraction performed on intact bacterial cells. The overall sugars composition of such extracts is presented in Table 1 . The different strains present distinct sugars composition. NCTC 11637 contains a large amount of Rib, possibly a contamination from RNA, glucose (Glc), and galactose (Gal) whereas 968 presents also Gal and Glc but is richer in N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and d-glycero-d-manno-heptose (ddHep) and 14255 is richer in Gal and GlcNAc. Lower amounts of fucose (Fuc), arabinose (Ara), Man, and lglycero-d-manno-heptose (ld-Hep) have also been observed in all strains. The occurrence of Ara has never been reported to occur in H. pylori. The different sugar contents might reflect both strain-to-strain variability and biosynthetic microheterogeneity.
To highlight the structural features of these polymers, the linkage profile held by the identified sugars was further evaluated by GC-MS of the permethylated alditol acetate derivatives released after hydrolysis of the original glycans.
Linkage analysis has revealed, in all CBA grown strains, a prevalence of O-3-linked Gal and O-4-linked GlcNAc residues in proportions of approximately 1 : 1. Based on previous knowledge on H. pylori cell-surface glycans [8] , these structures belong to N-acetyllactos- [8] . Low amounts (<5%) of other O-chain and corerelated residues have also been identified and assigned as shown in Table 2 .
Man was observed in all extracts in percentages that span from 5 to 11% of total sugars (Table 1) . These residues are essentially found as terminal, O-2-, O-6-, and O-2,6-linked (Table 2) . Monteiro et al. [14] have shown the occurrence of a mannan containing these characteristic linkages when studying a H. pylori mutant strain. Methylation analysis shows that the Ara residues occur mainly as O-2-substituted even though trace amounts of terminal and O-5-linked residues could also be observed.
In addition to LPS sugars, Man and Ara, high amounts of O-4-linked Glc residues [fi4)-Glcp-(1fi] were also common to all extracts ( Table 2 ). The total amount of O-4-substituted Glc was found to vary from 5 to 26% of total sugars and its presence in glycan-rich water extracts is now being described for the first time for H. pylori. To confirm the presence of amylose-like glycans, H. pylori cells were treated with Lugol iodine solution. The bluestained cells shown in Fig. 1 demonstrate the presence of amylose, with (1fi4)-d-Glc in a configuration. Trace amounts of O-4,6-linked Glc residues were also identified in all samples, suggesting the existence of residual branching points in the glucan chain. Because the CBA culture medium contains starch, it is not possible to identify the origin of this material, if produced by the bacterium or uptaken from the medium.
To determine if H. pylori was capable of biosynthesizing amylose-like glycans, the reference strain NCTC 11637 and the clinical isolate 968 were grown in Ham's F12 defined liquid media, which is devoid of polysaccharides in its composition. Cellular growth was promoted in the absence of external growth enhancers such as FBS, BSA, or cyclodextrin further fulfilling the requirement for a glycan-depleted environment. As it can be observed from sugars (Table 1 ) and linkage (Table 2) analysis, growth in liquid medium resulted, in both strains, in an increase percentage of Man and sugars belonging to the LPS moiety (Glc, Gal, GlcNAc, and Hep). The two strains also retrieved positive for the presence of amylose in liquid medium thus demonstrating the capability of those strains to synthesize amylose-like glycans in a polysaccharide-depleted medium. To fully access the structural organization of the O-4-linked glucan, the water extracts from H. pylori reference strain NCTC 11637 was fractionated by sizeexclusion chromatography on a Bio-Gel P6 medium.
Fractionation of the glycan-rich material in a Bio-Gel P6 resulted in the elution profile presented in Fig. 2 , from which six fractions were identified and labeled from A to F.
The high-molecular weight fractions (A-C) were composed mainly of Gal (31-36%), Man (24-30%), Glc (17-25%), and also contained Rib (7%). Lower amounts of GlcNAc (2-5%), Fuc (3%), dd-and ld-Hep (1-3%), and Ara (2%) have also been observed (Table 3 ). Linkage analysis allowed assigning the Fuc, Gal, GlcNAc, dd-and ld-Hep to the LPS moiety (Table 4 ) [8] . The Ara residues in fractions A-C were almost exclusively found O-2,3,5-linked (Table 4) , a very uncommon substitution pattern in nature, although reported to occur in some seeds [29] . Residual amounts of terminal, O-2-, and O-5-linked Ara residues were also identified. Their presence throughout all fractions points towards that variously linked Ara residues are structural motifs of H. pylori strains.
The percentage of O-4-linked Glc residues increased from fractions A to F (Table 4) . Glc was found to be the second major component of fractions A-C, and predominantly identified as being O-4-linked (66-79% of the total Glc) The remaining Glc was either found in the O-3-linked form (7-14% of total Glc), assigned to the LPS, or O-6-linked form, assigned to dextran antenna in the LPS [12] . Terminal Glc was also present in percentages that span from 5% (fraction C) to 11% (fraction A) of total Glc and can either be found in the terminal ends of LPS core and dextran antenna as well as in the O-4-substituted glucan. Such structural diversity makes impossible the determination of the exact percentage of terminal Glc belonging to the glucan chain thus hindering the estimation of the molecular weight based on O-4-linked Glc ⁄ terminal Glc ratio. Linkage analysis on fractions A-C also showed residual amounts of O-4,6-disubstituted Glc (2%) thus reinforcing that, even though almost exclusively linear, the glucan might exhibit vestigial branching. In fraction D, the O-4-linked Glc was the most abundant linkage. Still, it contains significant amounts of Man and Gal (16 and 19% of total sugars, respectively) and, in lower percentages, Rib (9%), Fuc (5%), Ara (4%), GlcNAc (2%), dd-Hep (3%), and ld-Hep (4%). Fractions E and F were composed almost exclusively of O-4-linked Glc (83 and 78%, respectively). Assuming a linear structure, the (1fi4) ⁄ terminally linked Glc ratio allows inferring that the average length of these polymers can vary from 42 (7 kDa, fraction E) up to 28 residues (4 kDa, fraction F) Glc residues.
The polyacrylamide Bio-Gel P6 is expected to separate molecules based on their molecular weight, from 6 kDa (void volume) to 1 kDa (inclusion volume). These conditions are valid when no interactions occur between the stationary phase and the eluted sample. In the present work, the eluent was water, which is known to not prevent molecular interactions. In that case, the sugar composition and linkage profile of the isolated fractions suggest that polyacrylamide Bio-Gel P6 separated the molecules based both on the molecular weight and their interactions with the gel medium. Linear molecules such as the described (1fi4)-glucan tend to be retained more in the column (fractions D-F) whereas the more branched and voluminous LPS carrying a lipid A moiety are found in earlier eluted fractions (A-C). In agreement with these observations, highly branched Man appear preferentially in fraction A (15% of O-2,6-disubstituted Man) whereas fraction B has only 2% of branched Man residues and no branching is found in fraction C. To confirm the anomeric configuration and other structural features of the H. pylori glucan, fraction E, which exhibits a higher percentage of Glc (79%) and contains only residual amounts of other sugars (>7%) was further used for NMR and ESI-MS analyses. The 1 H NMR spectra of fraction E retrieved a single anomeric resonance at 5.36 ppm thus demonstrating that Glc residues were in a configuration (Fig. 3A) . (Fig. 4A) . Even though the estimated chain length calculated from linkage analysis data was of 28 residues, some dispersion in the degree of polymerization is always expected, thus explaining the observation of molecules of lower molecular weight in the ESI-MS spectrum. Although the sugar composition of this fraction showed both Rib (8%) and Ara (6%) no evidences of a linkage between the Glc residues and a pentose was found.
To observe the extent of the contiguous O-4-linked Glc chains, fraction E was digested with an (1fi4)-a-d-glucan glucanohydrolase (a-amylase). This enzyme is responsible for catalyzing the endo-hydrolysis of (1fi4)-a-d-glucosidic linkages in polysaccharides containing three or more (1fi4)-a-linked d-glucose units. The digested material was then purified on a Bio-Gel P4 resulting in an elution profile composed of two Terminal Glc residues can also be addressed to the (1fi4)-glucan or the (1fi6)-dextran antenna in the lipopolysaccharides (LPS). tr, vestigial amounts (>0.5%); CBA, Columbia blood agar. H NMR spectrum of the material recovered from the void volume showed the disappearance of the a-anomeric signal, demonstrating the effectiveness of the enzymatic treatment (Fig. 3B) . The nonretained material was composed exclusively of disaccharides resulting from the enzymatic hydrolysis of the oligomeric glucan as demonstrated by the ion at m ⁄ z 365 observed in the ESI-MS spectrum (Fig. 4B) .
After having shown the expression of an amylose-like polysaccharide by H. pylori in both solid and liquid media, the impact of successive subcultivation on cell-surface glycans (LPS and amylose-type glycans) was evaluated. The reference strain NCTC 11637 and the clinical isolates 968 and 14255 were subcultivated in CBA. The impact of successive subcultivation on cell-surface glycans was determined by the analysis of the sugars carried out on the freeze-dried biomass of intact cells. The total LPS (Fig. 5A) , given by the amount of Fuc, Glc, Gal, GlcNAc, and Hep, LPS O-chain (Fig. 5C) , given by the amount of Fuc, Gal, and GlcNAc, were quantified independently based on the output from sugar analysis. The results are expressed in terms of concentration (w ⁄ w) for six passages in CBA comprising a total of 13 days in solid media. Betweenand within-sample variance was estimated by one-way ANOVA for each component (LPS, LPS O-chain, and amylose-type glycans) for the three strains during the subcultivation period. F-test (p = .05) performed on those estimates retrieved that between-measurements variance was more significant than random errors expressed by within-sample variance for all cases. For LPS (Fig. 5A) , an initial increase in the overall amount of the material was observed in all strains, possibly because of an initial adaptation of the bacteria when passing from a vegetative state in the glycerol inoculums to the solid media. However, this tendency is reversed after the third and the fourth passages after which the amount of total LPS expressed decreases. Figure 4 Electrospray-mass spectrometry spectra of (A) fraction E and (B) material recovered after digestion with a-amylase.
Variations in O-chain sugars, presented graphically in Fig. 6B , show the same tendency of the overall LPS. Amylose, in opposition to what has been observed for the LPS, is seen to increase continuously with the incubation time (Fig. 5C ). This effect was observed for all strains and demonstrates that H. pylori bioaccumulates amylose during the subcultivation period.
The plot of the total amount of LPS and LPS O-chain sugars versus the total amount of amylose throughout the incubation period (Fig. 6) suggests a correlation between the expression of LPS ⁄ LPS O-chains and amylose. However, this correlation could only be observed when the data from the first and second passages are not included. This seems to be most likely correlated with an initial adaptation period of the bacteria to solid medium upon recovery from a latent stage resulting from cryostorage.
The H. pylori reference strain NCTC 11637 and the clinical isolate 968 obtained after three passages in solid media (day 7) were further recovered to a F12 liquid media.
The glycan profile for each inoculum and F12 material are presented graphically in Fig. 7 . In both strains, a statistically significant (Student's t-test; p = .05) increase was observed in LPS content in the passage from solid to liquid media. This phenomenon was more pronounced in strain NCTC 11637 (48%) than in 968 (12%) and was caused almost exclusively by an increase in the concentration of O-chain sugars (62% for NCTC 11637 and 12% for 968). Conversely, the amount of amylose decreased significantly in the passage from solid to liquid media where only residual amounts were observed.
In the present work, we describe that H. pylori is capable of producing an amylose-like a-(1fi4)-d-glucan and further bioaccumulates this polysaccharide under selective pressure induced by subcultivation in the agar medium. Gathered information also suggests that H. pylori cell surface is composed of a mixed population of glycans comprising LPS, mannose-rich glycosides as well as capsular ⁄ exopolysaccharide a-glucans. The now observed amylose belongs to the class of biomolecules generally referred to as ''bacterial glycogen'' and considered to be a source of readily available glucose [30] . However, unlike most bacteria that indeed produce 8-12% branching in the O-6 Glc residues in glycogen [30] , in H. pylori only vestigial branching was observed (<1%).
Glycogen-like metabolism in bacteria is strongly correlated with the mobilization of ADP-Glc mostly by intracellular synthetic and degradative enzymes belonging to clearly identified families of glycosyltransferases (GT) and of glycosidases ⁄ transglycosidases. In a study carried out by Henrissat et al. [31] , 55 currently sequenced bacterial genomes were screened for members of the most relevant families of GT (GT5, GT35, GH13, and GH15). The authors concluded that a significant proportion of those microorganisms, including H. pylori 26695 and J99 and Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 11168, lacked the necessary enzymatic machinery to metabolize glycogen-like molecules. Interestingly, all of them were parasitic, symbiotic, or fastidious thus suggesting that such genotype resulted from a trait associated with the parasitic behavior of the microorganisms. Our results now point in a different direction. Here, it is demonstrated that H. pylori, even though being recognized as extremely fastidious, indeed produces a-(1fi4)-d-glucans in vitro. This finding is in agreement with the recently reported capability of C. jejuni 81-176, a virulent model strain used in the study of mechanisms and pathogenesis of C. jejuni infection, of also producing a a-(1fi4) glucan [32] . Another example of a generally regarded as nonproducing glycogen Gramnegative bacteria is Neisseria meningitidis [31, 33] . Again, in this case, evidences of strains producing glycogenlike molecules have been presented, as demonstrated by the identification of a genetic loci encoding amylosucrase in N. meningitidis 93246, responsible for the production of amylose from sucrose [33] .
The events triggering the overexpression of a-(1fi4)-d-glucans have been correlated with the responses of the organism to environmental pressure or long-term survival strategies. The bioaccumulation phenomenon has been previously observed in microorganisms facing limiting growth conditions [34] as well as in grapevine plants as a nonspecific response to biotic and abiotic stresses [35] . This stress-related strategy based on the production of a-glucan seems to be common to microorganisms and plants. In bacteria, environmental pressure resulting from shortage of a nutrient such as nitrogen in the presence of excess of carbon has also been reported as responsible for the intracellular accumulation of this polysaccharide [31, 34, 36] . Some bacteria, however, accumulate them in the exponential growth phase [37] . In line with this observation, a recent report concerning the pathogenic Gram-negative bacteria Vibrio cholerae states that the capacity of this bacteria to store carbon as glycogen facilitates bacterial fitness when passing both from nutrient-rich human intestinal tract and nutrient-poor aquatic environments, facilitating the transmission to a new host [38] . Thus, it can be inferred that different organisms can trigger at some point of their life cycle the pathways leading to the expression of a-(1fi4)-d-glucans as a result of specific environmental pressure.
In this work, aware of H. pylori high fastidiousness, we further devoted our attention to fully understanding the influence of environmental pressure resulting from subcultivation in solid agar medium and recovery to liquid medium in the bacterium cell-surface polysaccharides. The results suggest that H. pylori cells facing a lag stage resulting from subcultivation in agar medium bioaccumulate amylose-like polymers over time. The observation of the decrease of cell-surface LPS, namely the O-chain, during subcultivation in solid medium is in accordance with previous reports [8, 39, 40] . A more up-to-date work carried out by Nilson et al. [41] further reinforced that the absence of high-molecular weight O-chains was a common feature in two clinical isolates after a number of experimentally passages both in vitro and in mice models. However, this phenotype was not evident in fresh human clinical isolates, where all cells expressed high-molecular weight O-chains [41] . In contrast, when H. pylori was in an exponential growth phase resulting from cultivation in F12 liquid medium, the amount of expressed amylose-like polymers decreased considerably. This decrease was accompanied by an increase in the overall amount of LPS mainly because of an O-chain increment. The observed overexpression of O-chain material upon recovery to the liquid medium was in agreement with previous reports [8] . Anyway, F12 has been shown to be able to overcome some of the lower growth rates exhibited by the solid media [6] and to be ideal for the rapid isolation, cultivation, and identification of H. pylori from biopsy specimens [42] , suggesting its success in mimicking in vivo growth conditions. Furthermore, LPS with high-molecular weight O-chains can be considered a characteristic in vivo phenotype during colonization of the human gastric mucosa.
Facing these considerations, it can be stated that phenotypes resulting from F12 growth may resemble in vivo cell-surface patterns. Thus, in vivo cells are led to produce elongated O-chains bearing Lewis antigens that are recognized as a prerequisite in the modulation of host-cell interaction and evasion to immune response. Silencing of O-chain expression accompanied by bioaccumulation of amylose-like polymers in solid media suggests a redirection in metabolic efforts in response to the no-longer need for interaction with the host and a response to a new environment. Moreover, the expression of elongated O-chains might be considered a favorable phenotype among planktonic free-swimming bacteria like the ones encountered during F12 growth. Its substitution by amylose-like polymers upon cultivation in solid medium may be because of a swift toward life on community and formation of biofilm frameworks that render the bacteria protection in certain specific microenvironments.
Based on these considerations, we are also led to think that H. pylori cell-surface polysaccharides undergo phase variation in response to different growth stages and environmental pressures. Even though at this stage the biologic role resulting from the decoration of H. pylori cell surface with a-glucans is still unclear, the expression of such structures in other bacteria reveals its key importance. Recent studies have highlighted that this class of polysaccharides do not restrict their function just to provide the microorganisms with resources to resist food depletion and long starvation periods. They have been shown to protect against phagocytosis [43] and modulate the host immune response [44, 45] . For example, inducing monocytes to differentiate into altered dendritic cells that fail to upregulate CD80 and to present lipid antigens to CD1-restricted T cells, and produce interleukin (IL)-10 but not IL-12 [45] . Thus, the expression ⁄ bioaccumulation of a-glucans can be thought to also contribute to the pathogenicity of the bacteria by aiding in the evasion ⁄ modulation of immune responses and conferring extra protection against external aggression and unfavorable environments.
Facing all these considerations, further work is being conducted to clarify the biosynthetic pathways behind the expression of a-glucans by H. pylori, to clarify the impact of specific environmental factors in amylose bioaccumulation, and to understand its biologic role.
Cocaine addiction is a complex behaviour that arises from the interactions between genetic and environmental risk factors. Twin studies indicate that the heritability of cocaine addiction is approximately 60% and fits a complex polygenic model [1] . Cocaine binds strongly to the dopamine transporter, and this blockade of dopamine reuptake is perhaps the key mechanism leading to cocaine addiction [2] . In fact, some studies have already reported genetic markers in dopaminergic brain systems associated with cocaine dependence [3] [4] [5] . However, many of those markers are also associated with other psychiatric disorders or substancerelated disorders other than cocaine-related disorders and therefore might not be specific markers for the cocaine dependency risk [6] [7] [8] . The results of twin studies indicate that the heritability of substance dependence can be general or drugspecific, suggesting that specific genetic markers increase susceptibility to dependence on distinct drugs [9, 10] . In one of the largest studies of cocaine dependence to date [3] various polymorphisms were found to be associated with the cocaine-dependent phenotype, as has also been demonstrated in animal studies involving markers related to the dopaminergic reward system and to other biochemical pathways [11, 12] .
Although cocaine users use the drug in various forms, most can be distinguished by their preferred route of cocaine administration: inhalation (smoking crack cocaine); nasal (snorting powder cocaine); or injection (injecting a cocaine preparation) [13] . Those subgroups have been associated with specific characteristics of cocaine use: escalation of consumption; degree of abuse liability; propensity for dependence; and treatment response [14, 15] . It is argued that the reinforcing effect of smoked (crack) cocaine is greater than is that of snorted (powder) cocaine because, when the drug is smoked, the peak effect is achieved more quickly and concentrations of the drug in the central nervous system are higher for an equivalent amount of cocaine consumed [16] . Nevertheless, most cocaine-dependent patients have a preferred route of administration, despite having been exposed to both forms [13] . Therefore, the preferred route of administration can represent a distinct phenotype among cocaine users and should be taken into account when investigating individual genetic susceptibility to cocaine use and abuse.
One limitation of previous studies on genetic susceptibility to cocaine dependence, as well as to other complex disorders, is that known polymorphisms may explain only a small fraction of the heritability variance in cocaine dependence. Therefore, there is a need for studies investigating putative additional genetic markers associated with susceptibility to cocaine dependence, in particular those that might be specific to this disorder [17] .
Pharmacogenetic factors, especially genetic aspects that modulate the plasma concentration of cocaine, could play a role in cocaine susceptibility and have yet to be studied. Once absorbed, cocaine is rapidly transformed in two main metabolites, benzoylecgonine and ecgonine methyl ester, both of which are pharmacologically inactive [18] . The hydrolysis that leads to the formation of ecgonine methyl ester is catalyzed by butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), which is an enzyme involved in the metabolism of certain drugs (including cocaine and heroin), various local anesthetics, and short-acting muscle relaxants [19] . BChE is synthesized primarily in the liver and is distributed throughout the intestinal mucosa, in plasma, and in the white matter of the central nervous system [20] . The enzyme is encoded by the BChE gene (BCHE), which is located on chromosome 3q26 [21] . The BCHE genomic region spans approximately 70 kb, with four exons and three large introns [22] . Although more than 65 BCHE mutations have been identified, not all of them have been fully studied [23] . In general, these mutations produce enzymes with lower levels of catalytic activity than that of those produced by wild-type mutations [24] . BChE has also been tested as a novel therapeutic agent for cocaine dependence: a quadruple mutant hydrolase derived from human BChE suppressed cocaine toxicity and abolished drug-primed reinstatement in rats [25] . Our working hypothesis is that polymorphisms in BCHE lead to various enzyme profiles that allow different concentrations of cocaine to reach the reward system in the brain, thereby increasing or decreasing susceptibility to developing addictive behaviors.
The objective of this study is to identify genetic variations in BCHE as risk factors for dependence in patients whose primary drug of abuse is cocaine. We also investigate those genetic markers and the preferred route of cocaine administration for any existing correlation.
The patient sample consisted of 698 cocaine-dependent patients [mean age 26.867.2 years; 96% males (n = 669)], recruited and evaluated as inpatients and outpatients from seven drug dependence treatment clinics in São Paulo, Brazil. All of the patients met the criteria for cocaine dependence established in the tenth revision of the International Classification of Diseases. At enrollment, each patient was subjected to a screening interview, designed specifically for use in Brazil, that included questions related to sociodemographic variables and to drug use [26] .
We recruited 738 unrelated controls [mean age 31.369.8 years and 68% males (n = 501)] from the Fundação Pró-Sangue, Hospital das Clínicas, Universidade de São Paulo (Blood Donation Center at the University of São Paulo School of Medicine).
Exclusion criteria were: those with a history of drug abuse or recent use of illicit drugs, as were those with a history of psychiatric inpatient treatment or with a current psychiatric condition.
To conduct a comparative analysis according to the route of cocaine administration, we divided the patient sample into three subgroups: those who reported using only powder cocaine (typically by snorting); those who reported using only freebase cocaine hydrochloride (crack cocaine) which is smoked in small pipes and, those who reported using both routes of cocaine administration (dual users). A detailed description of the above subgroups can be found elsewhere [13] .
The study was approved by the Comissão de É tica para a Análise de Projeto de Pesquisa (CAPPesq, Ethics Committee for the Analysis of Research Projects) of the University of São Paulo School of Medicine. All participants provided written informed consent.
All of the participants were genotyped for three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in BCHE: rs1803274, rs4263329, and rs4680662. To that end, blood samples were collected in tubes containing ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, and genomic DNA was extracted by standard methods.
The SNP rs1803274 was selected because it is a common variant, known as the K variant, that leads to a functional decrease in BChE activity [24] . The other two SNPs were selected on the basis of the linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure of the gene, allele frequency, and available Haplotype Map data (http://hapmap. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/index.html.en). Genotyping was conducted by Prevention Genetics (Marshfield, Wisconsin, USA; http://www. preventiongenetics.com/). For all genotypes, the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was assessed using the Haploview software, version 4.2 [27] . To estimate the statistical power of the sample, we used the QUANTO program, version 1.2, assuming an odds ratio (OR) of 1.5, a disease prevalence of 0.03, a calculated average minor allele frequency of 0.27, and a significance level of 0.05 [28] .
We performed principal component analysis (PCA) to assess allele frequency differences between cases and controls due to ancestry differences and statistical analyses were performed using EIGENSTRAT [29, 30] . This software detects population structure inferring axes of genetic variation and outputs each individual's coordinates along axes of variation. The analysis was performed using a panel of 64 SNPs ancestry-informative markers (AIMs) and models were created with two to five principal components in order to detect the existence or absence of population structure; details of marker set are available on request. In our data set, we were not able to demonstrate a difference in population stratification between cases and controls therefore, no corrections using the PCA results were done in the association tests for the BCHE markers ( Figure 1) .
A general test of association (the two-degree-of-freedom test of genotypic association) was applied, and three individual contrasts, defined by a priori genetic models (additive, dominant, and recessive), were computed. In the dominant and recessive models, explanatory variables were binary. We employed logistic regression to adjust for age and sex. No statistical correction was made for multiple comparisons in the general test of association. The LD and the haplotype frequencies were estimated with the Haploview software, version 4.2. Haplotype blocks were identified using the solid spine of LD method in Haploview and correction for multiple testing was performed using permutation correction by the Haploview program [27] . Chi-square values, ORs, and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) were estimated using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, version 17.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois, USA).
The socio-demographic and clinical characteristics of the participants are summarized in Table 1 . The patient and control groups differed significantly in terms of sex and age. Most of the patients used cannabis and were cigarette smokers. Roughly half of the patients ingested more than 50 units of alcohol per week and had been in prison at least once. In terms of the preferred route of cocaine administration, 23% of the participants reported using the nasal route (snorting powder cocaine) exclusively, 9% reported using the inhalation route (smoking crack cocaine) exclusively, and 68% reported using both routes concurrently (dual users). For cases and controls, none of the allele distributions deviated significantly from those expected on the basis of the HardyWeinberg equilibrium (Table 2) . When we adopted a recessive model of transmission, the GG genotype of rs4263329 was less common in cases than in controls [f(GG) = 1.2% vs. f(GG) = 2.6%; OR 2.3, 95% CI = 0.99-5.32]. After adjustment for age and sex, that association was no longer significant (P.0.1). As can be seen in Table 2 , genotypes of the two other markers did not differ between cases and controls, nor did the allele frequencies of the three markers. Measures of LD and haplotype blocks across BCHE did not produce any evidence for an association with disease (data not shown). Results of the general tests of association for the preferred route of cocaine administration can be seen in Table 3 . Of the three markers, only rs1803274 was associated with distinct genotypes among the subgroups of cocaine users. Among the a priori genetic models, the recessive model (genotype AA) best accounted for the significant difference between crack users and powder cocaine users (P = 0.027; OR = 4.36; 95% CI = 1.18-16.04), as well as for that observed between crack users and dual users (P = 0.001; OR = 5.83; 95% CI = 2.10-16.16). Those associations remained significant after adjustment for age and sex (data not shown).
We evaluated the distribution of three SNPs in BCHE in a sample of cocaine-dependent patients and controls in Brazil. For the SNP rs4263329, there was a nominal association between patients and controls [GG genotype, P = 0.05, OR = 2.3; 95% CI = 0.99-5.32]. We also found a significant association between rs1803274 and crack cocaine (AA genotype) as the preferred route of administration (p,0,005). To our knowledge, this is the only report in the literature investigating BCHE variants and crack/ cocaine.
We are aware that these results could be false positive ones, but in order to minimize the likelihood of it, we used the best available methodology and analysis. Firstly, the investigated sample is one of the largest samples of crack/cocaine patients reported in the Figure 1 . Population Structure Analysis. Graphic representation of the first two principal components for cases and controls genotyped with 64 AIMs, each point in this plot is an individual. The distribution of individuals in the axes is similar for both groups therefore the EIGENSTRAT software was not able to detect a difference in population stratification between cases and controls. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0080505.g001 literature to study genetic susceptibility for cocaine dependence to date. We also adjusted for confounding factors (age and sex) to confirm that the association was not due to bias. Population stratification was tested with the EIGENSTRAT software and no differences were observed between cases and controls which could hinder the association results. In contrast with other studies investigating the association of genetic markers and cocaine dependence [31, 32] , subjects in the present study were stratified by .50 units/week, n (%) 247 ( their preferred route of drug administration. This may decrease the sample's clinical heterogeneity, which frequently reduces the power of genetic association studies. Another confounding factor in previous studies was a concomitant dependence on other drugs, mainly alcohol and heroin. In the present study, individuals with alcohol dependence were excluded, and heroin dependence is very rare in Brazil (less than 1% of our sample used heroin). This attempt to make the sample more homogeneous may strengthen the specificity of any genetic association found as related to the condition of cocaine use per se. From a statistical standpoint, our sample had a power of 88% of detecting true associations.
One of the markers investigated in our study, rs1803274, was not associated with cocaine dependence but was associated with crack smoking as the preferred route of administration. Although the rs1803274 marker has previously been shown to be associated with behavioral and medical conditions [33, 34] , we found no studies investigating the role of rs1803274 in substance dependence or other substance-related psychiatric disorders to date. The fact that we found an association only when the sample was divided into subgroups is not unique. An association with a genetic marker in cocaine dependence was found when the sample was subdivided into those who had experienced psychotic symptoms during episodes of cocaine intoxication and those who had not [35] . Because cocaine dependent subjects constitute a heterogeneous group not only from a genetic standpoint but also from a clinical perspective, it is useful to study them in meaningful subgroups. Dual users have distinct clinical features that distinguish them from those who are exclusive users of crack or snorted cocaine [13] . In the present study, allele frequencies for rs1803274 were very similar to the values for the Haplotype Map population of Utah residents with ancestry from northern and western Europe (CEU population). We also found that the frequency of the AA genotype in our sample as a whole was greater than in the CEU population (3.3% compared to 1.7%). The other two markers investigated have been infrequently used in association studies. Twelve BCHE SNPs were tested in farmers exposed to organophosphates and rs4680663 was not found to be associated with cholinesterase activity [36] . We found no association studies using the SNP rs4263329 as a marker.
Common variants have been associated with altered cholinesterase activity in samples drawn from the community [36] . The SNP rs1803274 is a common variant in BCHE, and the A allele leads to a point mutation at nucleotide 1615 that changes codon 539 from GCA (ala) to ACA (thr) [38] . In carriers of the A allele, serum BChE levels are reduced by 30%. Decreased BChE activity increase the amount of cocaine that reaches the reinforcing brain areas, thereby augmenting its propensity to lead to dependence. Most cocaine users in Brazil have equal access to crack and powder cocaine, and the AA genotype can, in part, explain the fact that some users prefer to use crack cocaine exclusively. It is likely that the enzymatic changes interact with other known predisposing factors for crack dependence and account for part of the genetic vulnerability to this route of administration.
Like any genetic association study, our study has limitations that must be addressed. First, although we found a nominal association between rs4263329 and cocaine dependence, that association lost its significance after being adjusted for sex and age. Nevertheless, that is an interesting finding that warrants further studies in comparable populations. Second, our sample size, although large for this particular line of research, could be considered small for a genetic association study looking for a susceptibility gene with a small magnitude effect. Third, although the marker reported here to be associated with exclusive crack cocaine use has been correlated with functional enzymatic alterations in other studies, we did not obtain any cholinesterase measures, which would have allowed us to make a functional correlation between carrying the marker and its function in patients and controls [23, 36] . By the same token, we had no objective parameters of cocaine use in cases and controls, such as toxicological measurements of cocaine in hair or urine. The subjective ratings reported by cocaine users are known to be unreliable markers of the true amount and frequency of illegal substance use, and that holds true for selfreported drug use by non-dependent subjects, such as our controls [37] . Although we consider it unlikely, it is possible that our controls underreported cocaine use and dependence, which would have decreased the strength of the association found in the present study. Finally, it is possible that the BCHE SNP that is associated with vulnerability to crack use is not the actual causative SNP; instead, other nearby SNPs in LD could be the alternative causation.
Although some investigators have identified genetic components of susceptibility to cocaine dependence, only a small portion of the heritability is explained by those findings [17] . So many of the genetic susceptibility makers or genetic mechanisms for crack/ cocaine dependence are still unknown. The identification of these new genetic markers will contribute to prevent and to treat drug abuse/dependent patients. In the present study, we evaluated three SNPs in BCHE, all of which are potentially involved in cocaine metabolism. Although we did not find an association between those markers and cocaine dependence per se, we observed an association between the known functional genotype (the K variant) and a preference for the inhalation (crack smoking) route of cocaine administration. Further studies involving a replication in other independent case-control samples and/or investigation involving a correlation between the function and the genetic variants and/or sequencing of this region would be very welcome to clarify the preliminary findings of the present report.
Author Contributions
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, also called extrinsic allergic alveolitis is characterized by a combination of inflammation and fibrosis located in both the airways and the lung parenchyma [1] . This field has majorly evolved in the past few years, but a better understanding of diagnosis and treatment is necessary. Epidemiological data are unreliable at present as many patients with hypersensitivity pneumonitis might be erroneously diagnosed with other (idiopathic) fibrotic diseases [2] . The clinical presentation might be extremely variable even as the nature of the causal antigen; therefore, the cause is often concealed. Furthermore, the diagnostic process is hampered by a lot of uncertainties such as the role of specific antibodies and lymphocyte stimulation test, the role of antigen challenge test and the role of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) in the diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Other fields that need further research are prognostic factors to guide clinical decision-making and large registries including both acute and chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
A challenge of another kind is treatment of subacute and chronic forms. Next to antigen avoidance, pharmacological treatment still consists of immunosuppressive agents. This is a challenge as some chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis patients suffer from a relentless progressive fibrosis [3, 4 & ]. Therefore, new initiatives should be taken in order to help clinicians in making a proper diagnosis and Unfortunately, there is no uniform definition for hypersensitivity pneumonitis; however, a few items are commonly applied in former definitions: presence of pulmonary disease and systemic manifestations (weight loss, fever). The cause is an antigen to which the patient is sensitized, but this is not enough to develop lung disease [5, 6] . A clear definition is needed both for daily clinical practice and to boost clinical trials, warranted to improve care and treatment of patients.
The clinical behaviour is conventionally classified into acute, subacute and chronic forms; however, there are no widely accepted criteria and it is not sure whether these represent clinical stages of the disease [7, 8] .
Acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis is a syndrome characterized by fever, chills and diffuse myopathy, which often occur a few hours after exposure. Simultaneously dyspnoea, cough and chest tightness occur, but might be less prominent. Clinical examination reveals bibasilar crackles. The symptoms usually decrease over the course of a few hours or at maximum days. Acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis is thought to result from a significant exposure that makes antigen detection and subsequent avoidance crucial [8] .
Usually, subacute hypersensitivity pneumonitis is characterized by an insidious onset of cough and dyspnoea over a few months, which can be difficult to distinguish from another (idiopathic) interstitial lung disease or even an infection. Patients seem to have more pronounced systemic symptoms [8] . It is thought to result from a repeated (low-level) exposure to inhaled antigens.
Chronic (progressive) hypersensitivity pneumonitis is assumed to be the result of continuous, low-level exposure to inhaled antigens [9] . Patients present with progressive dyspnoea, dry cough, fatigue and weight loss. This disease is often associated with progressive fibrosis, with a presentation and evolution that is difficult to distinguish from fibrotic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) or idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) [10] .
Acute exacerbations are well recognized in IPF [11] , but have also been described in hypersensitivity pneumonitis [12] . They are characterized by fast progressive dyspnoea and the occurrence of new bilateral ground-glass opacities on high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT); exclusion of heart failure, infection or pulmonary embolism is mandatory [13] . Risk factors are low total lung capacity of diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide, a usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP)-like pattern on histology and increased neutrophils and decreased lymphocytes in BAL fluid [14] .
Categorization of hypersensitivity pneumonitis remains artificial; however, studies should be conducted aiming to determine disease behaviour and response to immunosuppressive agents in the individual patient.
Epidemiologic data vary according to local practices, geography, season, population studied and host risk factors. A very recent trial reported the annual incidence in Denmark to be lower than one per 100 000 inhabitants [15 && ]. Similar numbers come from Great Britain with incidence rate 0.9 cases per 100 000 person-years [16] . Annual incidence of hypersensitivity pneumonitis in New Mexico was reported to be 30 per 100 000 inhabitants [17] . However, these numbers might not reflect all hypersensitivity pneumonitis cases and more probably hypersensitivity pneumonitis epidemiology data represent only the tip of the iceberg, due to substantial underdiagnosis. Despite diagnostic pitfalls, hypersensitivity pneumonitis was found third most frequent intestitial lung disease (ILD) after IPF and NSIP [15 Also the data on prevalence of hypersensitivity pneumonitis cover a wide range: in the USA, it was estimated to be 420-3000 per 100 000 inhabitants, France 4370 per 100 000 inhabitants and Finland 1400-1700 per 100 000 inhabitants [19] [20] [21] .
Another way of looking at epidemiology is through specific data sorted per individual antigen. The incidence of hypersensitivity pneumonitis among pigeon breeders reaches 6-21% per year and among farmers 0.4-7% per year. But the burden of hypersensitivity pneumonitis might be even much more important as in one report hypersensitivity pneumonitis has been reported to develop in up to 52% exposed office workers (humidifier lung) and 37% lifeguards exposed to public swimming pools [19, 22] .
Pathogenesis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis is currently not fully understood, although the understanding of the different processes has massively increased in the past few years. Some aspects of the disease point to a certain systemic compound. For instance, only a small proportion of individuals exposed to hypersensitivity pneumonitis-associated antigens develop the disease, which raises the possibility that intrinsic factors of the host including genetic susceptibility may play a role [23,24,25 & ]. Other factors might be exposure to various environmental factors and subsequent changes in immune response in vitro and in early postnatal period. Examples are exposure to low doses of formaldehyde during pregnancy and perinatal antibiotics that may lead to alterations in susceptibility to Th2 or Th1/Th17-driven immune response [26 & ]. Furthermore, it has been shown that higher age may predispose to more pronounced fibrotic response [27] . An alternative explanation for the effect of aging might be the associated prolonged exposure to potentially harmful environmental agents or changes in the immune system associated with aging; this is currently not recognized.
The pathogenesis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis with marked inflammatory involvement (more acute forms) and hypersensitivity pneumonitis with dominant fibrotic response (more chronic forms) may also vary. Exposure to inhalation antigen may lead to a proinflammatory response by respiratory epithelial cells with further attraction of neutrophils (producing interferon g that is needed for Th1 immune response) and alveolar macrophages. Apoptosis of neutrophils leads to maturation of dendritic cells, which together with alveolar macrophages act as antigen-presenting cells. Release of interleukin-1, interleukin-12 and interleukin-18 enhances lymphocyte expansion and promotes Th1 differentiation. Profibrotic mechanisms have been less studied. Several mechanisms have been suggested: shift to Th2 cytokine milieu and role of interleukin-4 in fibroproliferation; exhausted antigen-specific T-cell lineage with functional impairment of antigen T-cell response may play an important role. Also bone marrow-derived circulating fibrocytes may participate in the pathogenesis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis by amplifying the inflammatory and fibrotic response [28 & ]. It is clear that the fibrotic response in hypersensitivity pneumonitis patients is different from IPF, as gene profile studies distinguished specific gene signatures in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis [29] and multiplex protein profiling in BAL suggested major differences between IPF and chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis [30] .
The diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis is based on a combination of antigen exposure and compatible clinical, laboratory radiologic and pathologic findings, but validated diagnostic criteria are lacking.
Crucial is a meticulous history-taking, which should be performed by a clinician highly experienced in identifying relevant antigens. The right diagnosis can only be made by integrating data from history (i.e. exposure), clinical examination, laboratory findings, imaging pulmonary function tests (PFTs), BAL and histopathology. A confident diagnosis can only be achieved in a multidisciplinary discussion [2] .
Identification of causative antigen is crucial for diagnosis, preventive measures and prognosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis; however, this represents a major challenge. Moreover, some cases primarily diagnosed as IPF or idiopathic NSIP might be revealed as undiagnosed hypersensitivity pneumonitis after multidisciplinary discussion [2] .
All available tools should be used to detect the source of exposure. The first step is a highly detailed patient's history of exposure both at home and other situations. The investigating physician should have the necessary expertise in identifying all possible sources of sensitizing antigens, which is a challenge, as exposure is extremely specific and the amount of possible causes exponentially grows [31] . The second step is laboratory tests for confirmation of suspect antigen or as screening tool using precipitation reaction against causative antigens [32] and detection of specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies [33] . A third method is an exposure test that can be performed by exposure to the environment with potential source of antigen or by direct inhalation of the antigens or their mixtures (for instance, purified and diluted derivatives from the dusts or liquids from the workplace) [34 & ].
There is a long list of potential antigens and there is only a limited number of antigens available for detection (Table 1 ). It would be helpful to have panels of antigens for screening, but the value of these panels should be investigated [35 36] . Moreover, we also miss reliable normal values of the specific IgGs [37] . It is also not known whether longitudinal monitoring of the specific IgGs has a meaning for evaluation of the disease activity or prognosis of the patient.
Chest imaging is a crucial part of diagnostic process in hypersensitivity pneumonitis, as this should raise the suspicion of a possible hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
Chest radiograph has almost always in sufficient resolution to recognize the typical changes of hypersensitivity pneumonitis [38] . Acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis can present with ill-defined nodules and areas of ground-glass opacification in both the lungs. In chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, reticulation and a honeycomb pattern can be detected.
HRCT has substantially better resolution to distinguish and define the typical changes. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis presents as ground-glass opacification, centrilobular nodules, air trapping (mosaic pattern), fibrosis, emphysema and often a combination of patterns [39, 40] (Fig. 1) . For prognostic reasons, hypersensitivity pneumonitis can be subdivided into two radiological subtypes: fibrotic and nonfibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis. The presence and the extent of fibrosis on computed tomography are associated with increased mortality [41] . Moreover, the severity of traction bronchiectasis and extent of honeycombing are powerful predictors of mortality in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis. In the study of Walsh et al. [42] , scoring system for estimating prognosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis was used. It comprised whole disease extent, ground-glass opacification, fine and coarse reticulation, honeycombing, emphysema and consolidation. The authors concluded that HRCT patterns, in particular, severity of traction bronchiectasis and extent of honeycombing, are superior to PFTs for predicting mortality in patients with hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Differentiation of NSIP and IPF is difficult; if lobular areas with decreased attenuation and vascularity, centrilobular nodules and absence of lower zone predominance are present, chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis is more likely (Fig. 2 ) [43] .
In acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis, PFTs might be normal [44] ; however, PFT are often characterized by a restrictive pattern and a decreased diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide. In some patients with farmer's lung, an obstructive pattern might be present, resulting from emphysema. The role of PFTs is mainly to determine the severity of the functional impairment both at diagnosis and at follow-up [7] ; however, serial PFT data are sparse.
However, BAL is not recommended routinely in the diagnosis of IPF, it is considered a highly sensitive method to evaluate lung inflammation in a patient suspected of having hypersensitivity pneumonitis [7] . In acute forms of hypersensitivity pneumonitis, an increase in both total cell count and percentage lymphocytes is usually found [7] . In chronic forms, BAL fluid lymphocyte count is lower or can even be normal. Lymphocyte count might also be influenced by age, smoking status and the use of corticosteroids [9, 45, 46] . A low T4/T8 ratio has been pathognomonic for hypersensitivity pneumonitis; however, this is not absolute [47, 48] . The main discussion is raised by the inflammatory pattern (elevated lymphocyte count) in BAL fluid becoming less prominent the more fibrotic the disease becomes [49 && ]. The cutoff for lymphocyte count also differs, but 30% is often used. However, in patients with hypersensitivity pneumonitis with a UIP pattern, lymphocyte count is lower than 30% [50, 51] . More than 80% of chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis patients have at least 20% lymphocytes in BAL fluid [52, 53] . Also in the follow-up, BAL might be useful as persistent BAL fluid abnormalities may indicate that complete avoidance has not been achieved [1] .
So it is clear that an elevated lymphocyte count in a patient with suspected UIP warrants thorough investigation to rule out chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis. But a more comprehensive approach toward interpretation of BAL fluid is urgently necessary.
Histopathological evaluation is another crucial element in the multidisciplinary diagnosis. This is needed in case when antigen exposure is missing and/or when radiologic findings are not typical for hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Not all patients are able or willing to have a surgical biopsy, which leads to major diagnostic uncertainty. Recent developments show promising results for transbronchial cryobiopsy in the diagnosis of ILD [54] , although further confirmation of sensitivity and specificity is necessary. In the more acute form of the disease, the typical histopathologic changes comprise lymphocytic alveolitis with bronchiolocentric accentuation, non-necrotizing epitheloid cell granulomas, intraalveolar fibrosis and cellular bronchiolitis [55] . On the contrary, in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, the morphologic features are not always specific to be diagnostic for hypersensitivity pneumonitis: UIP-like patterns can be observed, even as NSIP-like patterns with peribronchial distribution, mild alveolitis/bronchiolitis and limited granuloma formation [51] . In most cases, the histopathologic findings might suggest the diagnosis of chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, but as the differential with fibrotic NSIP and IPF should be thoroughly made, the definite diagnosis should be resulting from a multidisciplinary team discussion. UIP-like pattern exhibits the worst survival in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis patients [51, 56, 57] .
The diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis and more particular chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis is difficult and as a result often missed. The diagnosis should be kept in mind when there is evidence of exposure to a relevant antigen. A relation between (start of) exposure and onset of symptoms is useful. In this regard, serum IgG/precipitins can be of help and in some instances challenge tests could be considered. In addition, BAL can provide more evidence for hypersensitivity pneumonitis. However, if the diagnosis is more difficult, surgical lung biopsy might be mandatory [58] . The use of lymphocytic transformation test should be considered in specific situations, for example if beryllium exposure is expected [59] . Specific inhalation testing has been described in a recent article suggesting that a positive test could be helpful in the diagnosis, whereas a negative test could not rule out hypersensitivity pneumonitis [60 && ]. In conclusion, an appropriate diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis is extremely complex, information of different levels should be integrated (clinical, radiologic, laboratory, histopathological data) and even then the diagnosis is often missed.
Sustained antigen exposure is associated with adverse outcome in many cases, so antigen avoidance is the main action, highlighting the importance of identifying hypersensitivity pneumonitis and uncovering the causal antigen in a certain patient. Another important issue is that the disease might relentlessly progress despite discontinuation of exposure. Next to prevention, the mainstay of pharmacological treatment is anti-inflammatory treatment (corticosteroids alone or in combination with immunosuppressive drugs), which might affect the disease course in few patients, especially in those with acute and subacute forms of the disease. However, it has become clear that more chronic forms do not always respond as well as expected.
Prevention is important, not only for the patient but also for sensitized individuals exposed to the same antigens without signs of the disease yet, to avoid them developing hypersensitivity pneumonitis in future. Also changes in the industrial or agricultural process might be imposed (introduction of full face masks, regular measurements of air quality, . . .) or the patient is advised to avoid exposure by all means (change work post or even profession).
The mainstay of treatment in hypersensitivity pneumonitis is corticosteroids, based on a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in acute farmer's lung. The authors have shown that patients given prednisolone showed more rapid improvement in lung function and a significantly higher diffusing capacity at 1 month compared with the control group. However, there was no difference in the long-term outcome between the two groups [61] .
Interestingly, recurrence of acute farmer's lung was more common among corticosteroid-treated patients who had continuing antigen exposure, raising the possibility that corticosteroid treatment was also suppressing the counterregulatory aspects of the immune response in these patients.
Determination of dose and duration of systemic immunosuppressive drugs is still not really established. The empiric scheme that is suggested is 0.5 mg/kg/day of prednisolone for 4-6 weeks followed by a gradual reduction until maintenance dose of approximately 10 mg/day [62] . Some authors suggest for a (sub)acute form of hypersensitivity pneumonitis between 3 and 6 months of treatment duration to achieve disease remission [7] . Usually, it is thought that for chronic forms, corticosteroids should be continued for a longer time.
A pragmatic approach is used in several experienced centres. In case the extent of the pulmonary involvement is mild, the patient has almost no symptoms and a causal antigen has been identified, prevention is crucial and steroids could be avoided. This approach should be further evaluated in specific clinical trials.
The more inflammation is prominent, the better the effect of anti-inflammatory drugs can be anticipated; however, in more chronic forms, fibrosis might be the main driving mechanism. Therefore, the effect of anti-inflammatory treatment in these cases cannot be overestimated, as suggested by Fink et al. [63] and has been recently confirmed in an Asian population [9, 64] . This is supported by the findings of several articles that steroids seem not to alter the long-term course of the disease as shown in patients with farmer's lung [65, 66] . In order to find a solution for patients with relentless fibrotic forms of hypersensitivity pneumonitis, not responding to classical immunosuppression, we should urgently develop new clinical trials with antifibrotic agents that have shown efficacy in IPF. One of the key questions of the design of such trials is whether they will be performed with anti-inflammatory or antifibrotic agents or their combination [67 & ].
Data concerning mortality trends are scarce in the literature. In England and Wales from 1968 to 2008, 878 deaths due to hypersensitivity pneumonitis were reported and increased in time from a first period (1968) (1969) (1970) (1971) (1972) ) to a later period (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) . Mortality was higher in men and with increasing age [68] . In the recent Danish cohort, 5-year survival in the hypersensitivity pneumonitis group was 93% [15 && ]. An interesting finding is that depending on the causative antigen, the prognosis seems to differ as there are some data suggesting that bird fancier's hypersensitivity pneumonitis might have a worse prognosis than farmer's lung. This might be because of the fact that patients with established fibrosis on HRCT and/or surgical lung biopsy have a poorer prognosis [50, 69, 70] .
The prognoses of other varieties of hypersensitivity pneumonitis are less well described; this is another unexplored field with a high unmet need, even as the use of biomarkers that might be helpful in determining prognosis.
Another problem is that acute forms seem to be more easily diagnosed, which might lead to underreporting of more chronic cases that have a worse prognosis. This may lead to an overestimation of real life survival. A possible way to get more insight in this problem is the start of new registries to help us solve these questions.
In conclusion, we can state that hypersensitivity pneumonitis seems to be much more prevalent than initially thought as there is no clear definition and differential diagnosis is challenging in unexperienced hands. There is an urgent need for better definition, diagnostic criteria setting and validation (including panels of IgG) and closer collaboration with occupational physicists. Imaging is important and, if not specific, histopathology is of real help if possible. BAL cell analysis can be helpful when an integration is done in a multidisciplinary discussion. Further research is warranted to develop prognostic markers that can drive clinical decisionmaking even as worldwide registers to increase our knowledge on evolution of the different disease forms.
Although treatment is rather easy for acute forms, it is a real challenge for more fibrotic chronic forms. Here it is crucial to start new trials to find more efficacious ways of treating those patients.
However, the future for hypersensitivity pneumonitis patients might look brighter, as with the rapidly expanding programmes on genotyping, proteomics and biomarkers which are being put into position, the field will not be alike in 10 years from now. 
Niemann Pick C [NPC-MIM 257220; MIM607625] disease is a neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorder due to mutations in NPC1 or NPC2 genes, characterized by the accumulation of endocytosed unesterified cholesterol, gangliosides and other lipids within the lysosomes/late endosomes. Both proteins are involved in the intracellular trafficking of cholesterol and other lipids. Thus, the deficiency of either of them leads to the accumulation of the endocytosed unesterified cholesterol, gangliosides and other lipids within the lysosome/late endosome compartment [1] .
Clinically, NPC disease presents a highly variable phenotype ranging from fetal to adult age. Even though initial manifestations are typically systemic, including liver and spleen enlargement, the disease has been classified according to the age at onset of neurological symptoms in: severe infantile form (onset before 2 y of age), late infantile form (onset between 3-5 y of age), juvenile form (onset between 5 and 16 y) and adult form (onset at age>16 y) [1, 2] .
Approximately 95% of NPC patients present mutations in NPC1 gene (MIM 607623; chr 18q11-q12) [3, 4] , which encodes a membrane glycoprotein of 1,278 amino acids containing 13 transmembrane domains and localized in late endosomes [5] . The other 5% of patients present mutations in NPC2 gene (MIM 601015; chr 14q24.3) [6] encoding a soluble 151 amino acid protein that is present in the lumen of lysosomes.
Despite the progress in characterizing the biochemical and genetic defects in NPC disease, the mechanisms underlying the pathophysiology of this disorder are not clear and the currently available therapeutic interventions are limited. In particular, the analysis of the molecular pathways linking the lipid accumulation and cellular damage in the brain has been challenging due to the limited availability of neuronal models.
Two mouse models of NPC disease have been described and used to study NPC pathogenesis, the BALB\c NPC [7] and the Npc1 (nmf164) mouse [8] . The naturally occurring BALB\c NPC mouse recapitulates the main features of human pathology [7] . However, while this model presents a very severe phenotype, most NPC patients present with a less severe form of the disease. This issue is particularly relevant when this model is used to test new potential therapies since the very acute nature of the BALB\c NPC mouse model may mask the potential benefits of therapies that could be useful in a clinical setting in patients. Recently, a new mouse model of NPC disease, Npc1 (nmf164) carrying a c.3163A>G mutation that results in an aspartate to glycine change at position 1005 (D1005G), has been generated. This mutant mouse displays a slower development of the NPC phenotype than the BALB\c NPC mouse. Therefore, it may represent a good model for the late-onset, slower progressing forms of NPC disease [8] . However, it is worth noting that some characteristic features of NPC human neurons are not present in mice, suggesting important species differences between mice and human NPC neurons [9] [10] [11] .
Many studies have been performed in peripheral cells in culture. However, the obtained results might not be extrapolated to neuronal cells since the pattern of accumulated lipids is quite different between peripheral and central tissues [12] .
Recent advances in human stem cell biology and the optimization of protocols for in vitro differentiation of stem cells into different cell lineages have opened new possibilities for generating disease cellular models.
Pluripotent cells have the ability to form all the body's cell lineages, including germ cells and some extraembryonic cell types [13] . The analyisis of blastocyst chimerism and tetraploid aggregation followed by gestation are the most appropriate tests employed to assess mouse stem cell pluripotency [13] . Human stem cell pluripotency cannot be tested for their ability to generate fully functional germ cells in vivo without raising ethical concern. Consequently, a surrogate test for human stem cell pluripotency is teratoma formation upon administration to a receptive animal [13] . Interestingly, a number of reports have demonstrated that adult human tissues host widely multipotent cells. Although these latter are able to differentiate, both in vitro and in vivo [13, 14] , into mesodermal [15] , ectodermal [16] and endodermal [17] derivatives, even at a clonal level [18] , they do not form either teratomas in vivo or contribute to the germ cell lineages, thus not entirely fulfilling the criteria for pluripotency. This may be secondary to epigenetic differences between adult and embryonic stem cells [14] .
Our group has described a highly reproducible method to isolate, from different adult human tissues (heart, liver and bone marrow), a population of multipotent stem cells (named Multipotent Adult Stem Cells or MASC), which express several pluripotent state specific transcription factors (i.e. OCT4, Nanog, Sox2, and Rex1), display high levels of telomerase activity and show all the characteristics of stem cells, such as clonogenicity and self renewal. Furthermore, they present a highly similar gene expression profile, irrespectively from the tissue of origin and they maintain the ability to differentiate along some derivatives of the 3 germ layers, including neuroectoderm [19] .
The aim of this study was to develop a human neuronal model of NPC disease by inducing neuronal differentiation of stem cells isolated from skin biopsies or fibroblasts in culture obtained from NPC patients.

Specimens from 3 patients affected by NPC disease (two of them were siblings) and 3 normal controls have been used in this study. Samples from a patient affected by Sandhoff disease were used as positive control for ganglioside accumulation assays.
All 3 NPC patients presented the classical biochemical phenotype characterized by massive lysosomal/ late endosomes accumulation of unesterified cholesterol in cultured fibroblasts. The diagnosis was confirmed by sequencing both NPC1 and NPC2 genes. All patients had mutations in the NPC1 gene. The two affected siblings presented the c.3182T>C (P.I1061T)/ c.3182T>C (p.I1061T) genotype, while the third unrelated NPC patient presented the c.2795+1G>C/ c.3493G>A (p.V1165M) genotype. This study was approved by the ethical committee of the University Hospital "S. Maria della Misericordia" and written consent was obtained from all subjects.
Stem cell enriched cultures were obtained, both from skin biopsies and from already established skin fibroblast cultures at early passages (P1, P2, P3), adapting the methods previously described [19, 20] .
Briefly, skin biopsies were minced and digested with 0.04% of collagenase type I (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 minutes at 37°C. Cell suspension was filtered through a 40 μm nylon membrane (Dako) and 4 × 10 4 cells/mm 2 were plated onto fibronectin coated dishes (10 μg/100 mm plate, from Sigma-Aldrich). In alternative, 2 × 10 6 cells directly isolated from human skin biopsies or 1 × 10 6 cells obtained from confluent primary skin fibroblast cultures, were seeded onto 100 mm plates coated with fibronectin and expanded at least for three passages in a selective media composed of 60% Dulbecco's Modified Eagle medium (DMEM)/40% MCDB-201 (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 1 mg/ml Linoleic Acid-BSA (SigmaAldrich);10 -9 M dexamethasone (Sigma-Aldrich); 10 -4 M Ascorbic acid-2 phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich); 1X Insulintransferrin-sodium selenite (Sigma-Aldrich); 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS), (STEMCELL Technologies), 10 ng/ml human PDGF-BB (Peprotech EC); 10 ng/ml human EGF (Peprotech EC). Medium was replaced every 4 days and cells were split when they reached 70/80% confluence.
Stem cells, at the third passage in culture (P3), obtained from healthy donors (n = 600 cells) and NPC patients (n = 600 cells) were individually deposited directly into fibronectin-coated wells of 96-well plates (Falcon, BD-Biosciences, Italy) with an automated cell sorter (FACSAria, BD), and cultured in expansion medium supplemented with 10% FBS [19, 20] . To determine sorting efficiency and to verify if any well was seeded with more than one cell, we utilized the Vybrant CFDA SE (CFSE) as a cell tracker (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen). Wells were examined twice a week in order to determine the fraction of cells able to give rise to proliferating clones.
Multilineage differentiation was evaluated as previously described [19, 20] .
Muscle cell-and endothelial cell-differentiation was achieved plating 0.5 to 1 × 10 4 /cm 2 cells in expansion medium containing 5% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 ng/mL bFGF, 10 ng/mL VEGF, and 10 ng/mL IGF-1 (all from Peprotech EC), but not EGF. Cells were allowed to become confluent and cultured for up to 2 weeks with medium exchanges every 4 days.
Hepatocytic differentiation was induced growing cells for two weeks at high density (2 × 10 4 /cm 2 ) onto fibronectin coated coverslips in a medium containing 0.5% FBS, 10 ng/ml FGF-4 and 20 ng/ml HGF (both from Peprotech EC).
For neurogenic differentiation, stem cells obtained after 3 passages in selective medium, were seeded at a density of 8000 cells/cm 2 into 96 multiwell plates (BD Biosciences) or on coverslips. The differentiation protocol was adapted from a method previously described [19, 20] . Briefly, cells were plated in medium containing DMEM-HG with 10% FBS (called N1 medium). After 24 hours the DMEM-HG was replaced with fresh medium supplemented with 1% of B27 (Invitrogen), 10 ng/ml EGF (Peprotech) and 20 ng/ml bFGF (Peprotech) (called N2 medium) for 5 days. Thereafter, cells were incubated for 24/48 hours in DMEM supplemented with 5 μg/ml insulin, 200 μM of indomethacin and 0.5 mM IBMX (all from Sigma-Aldrich) without FBS (called N3 medium).
After at least 3 passages in selective medium, stem cells were detached and stained with the following primary conjugated antibodies: CD10, CD13, CD29, CD49a, CD49b, CD49d, CD90, CD73, CD44, CD45, HLA-DR, CD117, CD34, CD271 (BD Biosciences), CD105, CD66e, KDR (Serotech), CD133 (Miltenyi Biotec), CXCR4, (R&D), ABCG-2 (Chemicon International). The percentage of cells expressing all considered antigens was determined by flow cytometry analysis (CyAn, Beckman Coulter). Properly conjugated isotype matched antibodies were used as negative controls.
Filipin staining was performed using the method described by Blanchette-Mackie et al. [21] . Briefly, cells grown on coverslips, were incubated in serum free medium for 24 hours and then treated for 24 hours with LDL enriched medium. Cells were rinsed with PBS and fixed with 3% paraformaldehyde. After washing them with PBS, the cells were incubated with 1.5 mg of glycine/ml PBS for 10 minutes, stained with filipin (0.05 mg/ml, in PBS 10% FCS) for 2 hours and examined using a Zeiss fluorescence microscope.
PAS was employed to detect glycogen accumulation. Slides were oxidized in 1% periodic acid for 5 minutes, rinsed three times in distilled water and treated with Schiff's reagent for 25 minutes. After extensive washing, slides were stained with Mayer's hematoxylin for 10 minutes.
Protein markers: Cells were grown on coverslips then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 minutes at room temperature, permeabilized 10 minutes at room temperature with 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) and stained overnight at 4°C to visualize stem cell markers: Oct4 (Abcam, Rabbit polyclonal, 1:150), Nanog (Abcam, Rabbit polyclonal, 1:200), Sox2 (Millipore, Mouse monoclonal, 1:200), Nestin (Millipore, 1:100); myocytes specific markers: smooth muscle actin (SMA) (Sigma, 1:50 mouse monoclonal) and α-sarcomeric actin (ASA) (Sigma, 1:100 mouse monoclonal); endothelial cell marker: CD31 (Dako, 1:50 mouse monoclonal); hepatic specific marker: cytokeratins 8, 18, and 19 (CK) (1:50 mouse monoclonal); or neural specific markers: tubulin beta 3 (COVANCE, 1:1000 mouse monoclonal), NeuN, (Millipore, 1:50 mouse monoclonal) and MAP2 (Millipore, 1:50 rabbit polyclonal). Secondary antibody staining was done with donkey antirabbit or donkey anti-mouse antibodies (Alexa-Fluor 555 or 488, Molecular Probes) at 1:600 dilutions. Images were obtained with a live cell imaging dedicated system consisting of a Leica DMI 6000B microscope connected to a Leica DFC350FX camera (Leica Microsystems); 10X (numerical aperture: 0.25), 40X oil immersion (numerical aperture: 1.25) and 63X oil immersion (numerical aperture: 1.40) objectives were employed.
GM2 and GM3 analysis: The analysis of GM2 and GM3 gangliosides was performed as previously described [22] . Cells were grown on coverslips then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 45 minutes at room temperature. Cells were then incubated at room temperature for 1 hour in blocking buffer [PBS with 10% normal donkey serum (NDS) and 0.02% saponin (Sigma-Aldrich)] and stained overnight at 4°C with mouse anti-GM2 (1:20 in blocking buffer) or mouse anti-GM3 (1:20 in blocking buffer). Cells were then incubated with a TRITC conjugated donkey anti-mouse IgM [1:80 in PBS with 2% NDS and 0.02% saponin (Sigma-Aldrich)]. For colocalization studies, a monoclonal anti-LIMP-1 (Novus Biologicals, Littleton, USA) was used as a primary antibody, and an Alexa fluorconjugated anti-mouse (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) as a secondary antibody.
In all cases, nuclei were stained by DAPI (Vector Laboratories, Inc) and Vectashield (Vector) was used as mounting medium. Epifluorescence and phase contrast images were obtained with a live cell imaging dedicated system consisting of a Leica DMI 6000B microscope connected to a Leica DFC350FX camera (Leica Microsystems); 10X (numerical aperture: 0.25), 40X oil immersion (numerical aperture: 1.25) and 63X oil immersion (numerical aperture: 1.40) objectives were employed. Adobe Photoshop software was utilized to compose and overlay the images, and adjust contrast (Adobe, USA). The counts of positive cells were done manually, considering, where possible, 100 positive events per sample.
Total RNA was extracted from both non-confluent cultures of undifferentiated and differentiated cells at P3 using the TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen). After treatment with DNase I (Ambion), first strand cDNA synthesis was performed with 1 μg total RNA using random hexanucleotides and MMLV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). Primers were designed from available human sequences using the primer analysis software Primer3 (Additional file 1: Table S1 ). Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using Roche LightCycler 480 Real-Time PCR System and the LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master (Roche), following manufacturer's instructions. GAPDH was used as internal control for normalization. LightCycler 480 Basic software (Roche) utilized the second derivative maximum method to identify the crossing point (Cp).
Apoptosis in differentiated cells at P3 was evaluated by staining of phosphatidylserine exposed on cell membranes with FITC labeled Annexin V, according to the manufacturer's instructions (Sigma-Aldrich) and analyzed by flow cytometry using a FACScan (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA).
Morphological analysis data were collected by using the BD Pathway bioimaging platform. Differentiated cells were first immunostained for the neural marker MAP-2, then images were acquired on a BD Pathway 855 using a 20X objective (0.75 NA) in the form of 2 × 2 montage. The images were then analyzed using BD's Neurite Outgrowth Algorithm that automatically measure parameters describing neurite outgrowth.
Statistical analysis was performed using Student's t test or one-way ANOVA test, followed by Bonferroni posttest. The analyses were carried out using the software Prism, version 4.0c, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA; JMP7, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA.
p<0.05 was considered statistically significant.

In order to isolate multipotent stem cells from NPC patient samples, we applied a protocol that was optimized for the growth of widely multipotent cells with mesenchymal features (named human multipotent adult stem cellshMASC) from several human tissues [19, 20] to both freshly obtained skin biopsies and previously established skin fibroblast cultures. If successful, this latter strategy would allow us to derive multipotent cells from already available bio-repositories of cell lines, obtained from patients suffering from rare diseases, such as NPC, for diagnostic purposes. When exposed to a selective culture medium enabling the growth of hMASC, proliferating cell lines could be obtained from all skin biopsies. On the contrary, only those fibroblast cultures that had not been extensively expanded in vitro (< 3 passages in vitro) were responsive to these stringent culture conditions. After 3 passages in the selective medium, the cells acquired a homogeneous morphology as shown in Figure 1A -D. No differences were observed neither between cells obtained from NPC patients and normal controls nor between cells obtained from biopsies or from already established skin fibroblast cultures.
In order to characterize the selected cells, their surface immunophenotype was analyzed. As shown in Figure 1E and Table 1 , cells obtained both from skin biopsies and fibroblast cell lines displayed an antigenic pattern characteristic of mesenchymal stem cells, very similar to the one observed in MASC isolated from heart, liver or bone marrow [19] . No major differences were observed between cells derived from NPC patients or normal controls.
Cultured cells were then evaluated for the expression of stem cell markers, such as the pluripotent state specific transcription factors Oct-4, Nanog and Sox-2 and the intermediate filament nestin. As shown in Figure 1F -K, the vast majority of cells (65 to 90%) expressed these markers and this expression was independent from the disease state. In fact, no significant differences were observed between NPC and normal cells or between cells isolated from both skin biopsies and early passages of fibroblast cell lines.
In order to investigate whether the pathologic phenotype was retained in these cells, the intracellular accumulation of unesterified cholesterol was analyzed by filipin staining. A massive accumulation of cholesterol within the endosomal/lysosomal compartment was observed in cells isolated from either skin biopsies or fibroblast cultures of NPC patients (Figure 1L-N) .
Therefore, in the light of these data, we decided to further characterize stem cells derived from already established skin fibroblast cultures and use them to develop a neuronal differentiation model.
Cell cultures showed two of the major features of multipotent adult stem cells such as clonogenicity and wide differentiation capacity. Specifically, when sorted as single cells into the wells of 96-well Terasaki plates, skin-derived cells were able to form proliferating colonies within 2 weeks after seeding. It is worth noting that cells derived from NPC patients seem to be less clonogenic than cells derived from healthy controls. Even if the differences were not statistically significant, this result suggests that some stem cells features may be compromised in NPC disease. The cells were able to differentiate along derivatives of all the three germ layers (Figure 2 , Additional file 2: Figure S1 and Additional file 3: Figure S2 ). In this regard, cultured cells generated not only neurectodermic derivatives (see below) but mesodermal and endodermal ones as well. Specifically, cells derived from both healthy controls and NPC patients cultured in a medium added with IGF-1, bFGF and VEGF expressed the myocyte specific markers alpha-sarcomeric actin (ASA) and smooth muscle actin (SMA) and the endothelial cell marker CD31 (Additional file 2: Figure S1 ). Additionally, cells exposed to hepatocyte differentiation medium assumed a globular shape and became positive for cytokeratins 8, 18, and 19 (CK). Moreover, they acquired some hepatocitic functions such as the ability to store glycogen as demonstrated by the PAS staining (Additional file 3: Figure S2 ).
Altogether these results indicate that cells obtained from fibroblast cultures of healthy controls and NPC patients exhibited almost an identical mesenchymal stem cell immunophenotype, expressed pluripotent state specific transcription factors, were clonogenic and multipotent; therefore, in analogy with our previous studies, we named them hSKIN-MASC.
Twenty-four hours after the induction of neural differentiation, hSKIN-MASC showed remarkable morphologic changes. As shown in Figure 2 (panels A-B) differentiated cells displayed an enlargement of the cellular bodies and the presence of long projections, closely resembling the morphology of neuronal cells. Importantly, the morphology of differentiated cells obtained from NPC patients and healthy donors was clearly distinct. In fact, with respect to healthy donors (Figure 2A ), differentiated cells obtained from NPC patients ( Figure 2B ) were larger and presented numerous projections similar to dendrites.
Upon differentiation, a large fraction of hSKIN-MASC became positive to markers of the neuronal lineage. In particular, they expressed NeuN ( Figure 2C-E) , a neuronal specific nuclear protein, and MAP2 ( Figure 2F-H) , a structural protein specifically present in neuronal cells. Interestingly, the percentage of cells expressing NeuN was significantly lower in cells derived from NPC patients than in cells derived from healthy donors. In addition, differentiated cells did not express markers associated with glial differentiation, such as glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and oligodendroglial protein 4 (O4) (data not shown). These data suggest that the differentiation protocol described here specifically favored the differentiation towards the neuronal lineage. It is worth noting that, after differentiation, the cells became negative for the pluripotent state specific transcription factors Oct-4, Nanog and Sox-2, while the expression of nestin was maintained throughout the differentiation process.
To further characterize the type of neuronal cells obtained, mRNA expression of specific markers of dopaminergic (tyrosine hydroxylase, TH and dopamine transporter, DAT), cholinergic (choline acetyltransferase, CHAT) and GABAergic (glutamic acid decarboxylase, GAD) neurons were analyzed by real time PCR. None of these markers were detected in undifferentiated cells. After differentiation, both cells derived from healthy donors and NPC patients expressed similar levels of CHAT mRNA (Additional file 4: Figure S3 ), while the levels of TH, DAT and GAD mRNA were undetectable.
No differences in the levels of apoptosis have been detected between differentiated cells derived from healthy donors and NPC patients (Additional file 5: Figure S4 ).
To determine whether neuronal cells obtained from NPC patients retained the characteristic NPC phenotype, intracellular accumulation of cholesterol and gangliosides was analyzed by filipin staining and immunofluorescence, respectively. As shown in Figure 3 , a massive accumulation of unesterified cholesterol was found in the bodies of differentiated cells obtained from NPC patients ( Figure 3B ). Furthermore, a percentage of these cells accumulated GM2 ganglioside as well ( Figure 3D) . Interestingly, the percentage of GM2 positive cells obtained applying the neuronal differentiation protocol to hSKIN-MASC from either NPC patients or a patient affected by Sandhoff disease was comparable ( Figure 3F ). GM2 accumulation was acquired during the differentiation process since this ganglioside could not be detected both in NPC fibroblasts (data not shown) and in undifferentiated hSKIN-MASC ( Figure 3C ). No accumulation of GM3 was detected both in normal and NPC cells (data not shown).
As mentioned above, NPC differentiated cells presented a morphology that was clearly different from normal cells. Therefore, in order to quantify the morphologic differences observed, we analyzed the neurite maximal and average length, neurite extremity, segment and root count and neurite node points, using the Neurite outgrowth image program on cells that stained positive for MAP-2. Statistically significant differences were found for all the analyzed parameters between normal and NPC neuronal cell. As shown in Figure 4 , NPC differentiated cells presented longer neurites and a greater number of neurite extremities, segments, roots and node points.
The remarkable advances in the ability to obtain stem cells from different tissues, including skin (reviewed in [13, 14] and [23] ), which are able to differentiate into several cell lineages, offer the possibility to generate cells with neuronal characteristics from easily accessible sources.
It is conceivable then to develop human cellular models for the study of neurodegenerative diseases harvesting cells from skin biopsies of affected patients and committing them to a neuronal fate, thus paving the way to the study of pathways involved in the development of neurological diseases at the cellular level. NPC is a genetic severe neurodegenerative disease characterized by the accumulation of cholesterol and other lipids within the late endosomes and lysosomes. Although the neuronal degeneration is the main feature in NPC patients, the molecular pathways linking the lipid accumulation and cellular damage in the central nervous system are largely unknown.
Therefore, we developed a human neuronal model of NPC disease using a method based on the induction of neuronal differentiation of stem cells isolated from skin biopsies or primary cultures of fibroblasts obtained from NPC patients.
Here, we demonstrated that it is possible to isolate clonogenic adult stem cells expressing mesenchymal and pluripotent state associated markers both from skin biopsies and fibroblast cultures. In analogy with the multipotent adult stem cells that we have previously isolated from several adult human tissues, these cells were widely multipotent, being able to differentiate into derivatives of the three germ layers [19, 20] . For these reasons we named them hSKIN-MASC. The fact that we could obtain multipotent stem cells only from early passages of fibroblasts suggests that immature progenitors may be retained in those cultures but are lost upon serial expansion in vitro.
In particular, cells differentiated to neuronal fate expressed markers of mature neurons (NeuN and MAP2) and displayed morphological features resembling neuronal cells. It is worth to highlight that nestin, a marker of the early ectoderm lineage, was expressed both in neural stem cells and in hSKIN-MASC. These data suggest that hSKIN-MASC may represent a population of cells that share some features with the ectoderm lineage. This observation also suggests a common origin between hSKIN-MASC and Skin-derived Precursors or SKP, a multipotent cell population isolated from human dermis that shows a differentiation potential towards both mesenchymal and neural lineages. SKP are believed to be of neural-crest origin [24] and are retained throughout adulthood, although they decrease with age [25] .
A preliminary characterization of the type of neuronal cells generated by this method, suggests that under the experimental conditions described, hSKIN-MASCs differentiated to cholinergic but not to dopaminergic or GABAergic neurons. and NPC patients (n = 3) skin fibroblast derived cultures, before (Undiff.) and after the exposure to neuron induction media (Diff.). At least 400 cells have been counted for each cell line. Data are presented as mean ± SD of 3 independent experiments one-way Anova test followed by Bonferroni post-test were utilized to compare means between groups. P values less than 0.05 were considered significant. P values less than 0.05 were considered significant. *, **, ***, p<0.05 vs. columns 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Differentiated cells obtained from NPC patients showed some characteristic features of NPC phenotype. They accumulate unesterified cholesterol and GM2 ganglioside. The accumulation of GM2 ganglioside observed in the differentiated cells but not in fibroblasts or undifferentiated hSKIN-MASC, is consistent with data previously reported in NPC patients and NPC mouse models [10, 12, [26] [27] [28] [29] . However, while these studies reported that NPC neuronal cells also accumulate relevant amounts of GM3 ganglioside, no significant accumulation of this ganglioside was found in our model. Since it has been described that the accumulation of GM2 in the brain precedes the accumulation of GM3 [10] , it is possible to hypothesize that the model developed here recapitulates the early stage of the disease.
Furthermore, differentiated cells obtained from NPC patients displayed morphological features that are clearly different from those observed in cells obtained from healthy donors, such as the presence of longer neurites and a greater number of neurite extremities, segments, roots and node points. Interestingly, a distortion of the neuronal shape and an extensive growth of new ectopic neurites have been observed in cortical neurons obtained from human patients or animal models of NPC [29, 30] . In addition, although there is no clear loss of cholinergic neurons in NPC mice, it has been shown that in these animals cholinergic neurons display several morphological alterations [31] .
The identification of morphological alterations in differentiated NPC cells that seem to recapitulate what has , and compared to cells obtained in the same way but from a patient affected by Sandhoff disease, a specific GM2 gangliosidosis. No GM2 accumulation was detected in both healthy controls (CTRL, n = 3) and NPC (n = 3) undifferentiated cells, whereas a significant fraction of differentiated NPC (n = 3) and GM2 gangliosidosis derived cells showed accumulation of the glycosfingolipid. At least 400 cells have been counted for each cell line. Data are presented as mean ± SD of 3 independent experiments; one-way Anova test followed by Bonferroni post-test were utilized to compare means between groups. P values less than 0.05 were considered significant. *, **, ****, p<0.05 vs. columns 1, 2 and 4, respectively. The Sandhoff patient was omitted from the statistical analysis.
been described in human cortical NPC neurons is certainly fascinating. However, we cannot exclude that this phenotype is secondary to an impaired/altered differentiation of MASC isolated from NPC patients. Indeed, the lower percentage of cells expressing NeuN obtained after differentiation of hSKIN-MASC isolated from NPC patients seems to support this hypothesis. Further studies are planned to dissect the molecular mechanisms involved in this phenomenon.
Recently, two human cellular models of NPC disease have been developed by the specific silencing of NPC1 gene in the SH-SY5Y cells line [32] or in human embryonic stem cells [33] . Both models recapitulate the NPC biochemical phenotype. Although neuronal models obtained through the down-regulation of NPC1 expression in human cells may be useful to analyze some aspects of NPC pathogenesis, they are not suitable for the analysis of the impact of specific mutations on the pathologic phenotype or for testing mutation specific therapeutic strategies.
The model described here offers three main advantages with respect to the models cited above: 1-it was developed directly from patient's cells and therefore it would be useful to analyze the effect of specific NPC1 mutations within the context of the patient genetic/epigenetic background; 2-it was obtained through the differentiation of cells obtained from accessible sources, such as patients cultured fibroblasts, usually available in many laboratories for diagnostic purposes; 3-it did not involve the forced expression of transgenes in target cells, thus avoiding confounding results due to the reprogramming process.
We have demonstrated that it is possible to isolate stem cells from skin biopsies or fibroblasts in culture and to commit them to a neuronal lineage. Differentiated cells obtained from NPC patients present the main features of NPC disease. Therefore, this model will be useful to study the molecular basis of NPC neurodegeneration and might represent a powerful tool to perform drug screening on cells obtained from NPC patients presenting different genotypes. In addition, the strategy described here may be applied to easily generate human neuronal models of other neurodegenerative diseases.
Additional file 1: Table S1 . Sequences of oligonucleotides used for real-time PCR.
Additional file 2: Figure S1 . one-way Anova test followed by Bonferroni post-test were utilized to compare means between groups. P values less than 0.05 were considered significant. *, **, p<0.05 vs column 1 and 2, respectively. Additional file 4: Figure S3 . Relative expression of CHAT mRNA in cells derived from healthy donors and NPC patients. The relative abundance of CHAT mRNA were analyzed by real time PCR in cultures from healthy donors (CTRL, n = 3) and NPC patients (n = 3), before (Undiff.) and after neuronal differentiation (Diff.; 5 days in N2 medium + 48 h in N3 medium, see methods). Data were normalized by the expression of GAPDH and expressed as mean as mean ± SD of 3 independent experiments. Additional file 5: Figure S4 . Apoptosis in differentiated hSKIN-MASC derived from healthy donors and NPC patients. After induction of neural differentiation (5 days in N2 medium + 48 h in N3 medium, see methods) the levels of apoptosis were evaluated in cultures derived from healthy donors (CTRL, n = 3) and NPC patients (n = 3). Data are presented as mean ± SD of 3 independent experiments. 
Favorable results were reported from previous studies on childhood and adolescent B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL) and acute B-cell leukemia (B-AL) with 2 to 8 short intensive therapy courses depending on stage and tumor mass. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] The toxicity of these protocols was considerable, however. Therefore, the Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma-Berlin-Frankfurt-Münster 95 (NHL-BFM95) study aimed at reducing treatment-related toxicity without jeopardizing treatment outcome. In our previous trials, increasing the dose of methotrexate (MTX) from 0.5 g/m 2 to 5 g/m 2 (administered over 24 hours) resulted in significant improvement of the probability of event-free survival (pEFS) for patients with B-AL as well as for patients with B-NHL stage III with higher tumor load. 4, 9 However, high-dose MTX particularly contributed to the toxicity of the treatment, namely orointestinal mucositis, which may increase the risk of sepsis and toxic death. 4 High-dose MTX combined with racemic tetrahydrofolic acid (leucovorin) is a key component of the majority of treatment regimens currently used for childhood and adolescent B-cell neoplasms. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] 8 However, dose and administration schedule of MTX varies considerably between therapy protocols. Dosages of MTX range from 0.5 g/m 2 to 8.0 g/m 2 ; duration of continuous intravenous infusion of MTX ranges from 1 hour to 24 hours, resulting in very different pharmacokinetic profiles. Furthermore, time of application of the first dose of leucovorin varies between 24 hours 6 and 42 hours 4 after the start of MTX infusion, which introduces potentially significant differences regarding the duration of MTX exposure of healthy and malignant cells.
All mentioned parameters-dosage, administration schedule, drug exposure time-may influence efficacy and toxicity of MTX therapy. [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] Controlled clinical trials investigating the impact of these parameters on treatment efficacy and toxicity are still lacking. Therefore, in order to optimize the MTX therapy in the treatment of children and adolescents with B-cell neoplasms, we investigated 2 questions in study NHL-BFM95. First, we tested in a randomized trial whether the incidence of severe orointestinal mucositis can be reduced by shortening the duration of intravenous infusion of high-dose MTX from 24 hours to 4 hours without impairment of the probability of failure-free survival. Second, we tested whether for patients with unresected B-NHL of moderate tumor mass (lactate dehydrogenase [LDH] Ͻ 500 U/L), representing approximately 45% of B-NHL patients, the dose of MTX can be reduced to 1 g/m 2 without lowering the probability of EFS of 95% or higher that the patients achieved in our previous study NHL-BFM90, with therapy courses including MTX 5 g/m 2 . 4 Figure 1 . Treatment strategy. Patients were stratified into 4 risk groups: R1, R2, R3, and R4. The composition of therapy courses is given in Table 1 . V indicates cytoreductive prephase. IV indicates intravenously; h, hour; IT, intrathecally. *Doses were adjusted for children younger than 3 years. In courses A, B, AA, and BB, intrathecal therapy was administered 24 hours after beginning of MTX intravenous infusion.
†Patients were randomized to receive MTX as continuous intravenous infusion either over 24 hours or over 4 hours. In the 24-hour arm, 10% of the MTX dose was given within 0.5 hours, 90% of dose intravenously over 23.5 hours. Racemic folinic acid (leucovorin) intravenously 15 mg/m 2 at hours 42, 48, and 54 after beginning of MTX. In courses AA and BB, the dose of leucovorin at hour 42 was 30 mg/m 2 intravenously. Adjustment of leucovorin dose in case of impaired MTX excretion as previously described. 4 ‡For CNS-positive patients, chemotherapy was applied intraventricularly as described in "Chemotherapy." §Courses AA and BB are the same as A and B, respectively, with the exceptions listed. ¶Subdivided in 3 doses. Maximum dose was 2 mg; vincristine was not given in patients of branch R1. **Doses are 12 hours apart. † †Maximum dose was 5 mg.

Children and adolescents up to 18 years of age newly diagnosed with mature B-cell NHL or B-AL were eligible for trial NHL-BFM95. From April 1996 to March 2001, 566 patients were registered from 84 clinics in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland after informed consent according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Approval of the study was obtained from the ethical committee of the principal investigator (A.R.) and the participating investigators. Due to the following criteria, 61 patients were excluded: previous treatment (n ϭ 4), no therapy (n ϭ 3), NHL as a second malignancy (n ϭ 4), severe immunodeficiency (n ϭ 14, 4 failures), preexisting disease prohibiting protocol therapy (n ϭ 1), AIDS-related NHL (n ϭ 1, 1 failure), posttransplantation NHL (n ϭ 11, 3 failures), treatment according to a different protocol due to decision of 2 participating clinics (n ϭ 21, one failure), or erroneous diagnosis (n ϭ 2). There were 505 patients eligible for the trial.
NHL subtypes originally diagnosed according to the updated Kiel classification for non-Hodgkin lymphomas 15 were reclassified on the basis of the WHO Classification of Hematological Malignancies. 16 In 466 of 505 cases, the diagnosis was centrally reviewed by one of the reference laboratories.
The St Jude staging system was used. 17 Staging included physical examination, peripheral blood and bone marrow (BM) aspiration smears, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analyses, ultrasonography, X-ray, computed tomography (CT) and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and skeletal scintigraphy. Initial central nervous system (CNS) disease was diagnosed if one of the following was present: lymphoma cells in the CSF, cerebral infiltrates on cranial CT or MRI, or cranial nerve palsy that was not caused by an extradural mass. The total serum LDH activity was measured as a parameter for the tumor mass.
Patients were stratified into 4 risk groups according to stage, resection status, pretherapeutic serum LDH, and presence of CNS disease ( Figure 1 ).
The treatment strategy is depicted in Figure 1 . The composition of therapy courses is given in Table 1 . Patients in risk groups R2, R3, and R4 received a 5-day cytoreductive prephase before the first course A (AA) was administered. By November 15, 1997, an amendment was introduced. All patients in R3 ϩ R4 had to receive urate oxidase 3 ϫ 50 U/kg per day intravenously during the first days of cytoreductive chemotherapy. [18] [19] [20] Conditions for starting the second and subsequent courses were as follows: platelet levels higher than 50 ϫ 10 9 /L and neutrophil counts higher than 0.5 ϫ 10 9 /L after the nadir of postchemotherapeutic cytopenia. For patients of risk groups R3 and R4, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 5 g/kg per day subcutaneously was recommended after the first 2 therapy courses. In CNS-positive patients, a device for intraventricular application of chemotherapy was implanted before the second course. MTX 3 mg and prednisolone 2.5 mg were administered intraventricularly on days 2, 3, 4, and 5, and cytarabine 30 mg was given on day 6 of courses AA and BB. In course CC, MTX 3 mg and prednisolone 2.5 mg were administered on days 3, 4, 5, and 6; cytarabine 30 mg was given on day 7. For patients in risk groups R3 ϩ R4 who had residual tumor after the fifth course of therapy, a second-look operation was performed. If viable lymphoma tissue was detected, megadose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue (autologous stem cell transplantation [ASCT]) was performed as previously described. 4 If no viable lymphoma tissue was found, therapy was continued with the last course CC in risk group R4, while patients in risk group R3 did not receive any further therapy. For patients in risk group R2, no intervention was foreseen in case of a persistent tumor remnant during or after therapy.
Patients were randomized to receive MTX as continuous intravenous infusion either over 24 hours (MTX-24h) or over 4 hours (MTX-4h). The dose of MTX was 1 g/m 2 in courses A and B, (risk groups R1 ϩ R2) and was 5 g/m 2 in courses AA and BB (risk groups R3 ϩ R4). Intrathecal therapy was given at hour 24 after the beginning of the MTX infusion in both randomized arms. The MTX serum concentration was measured at hours 24, 42, and 48 from the start of the MTX infusion. In both randomized arms, leucovorin 15 mg/m 2 was given intravenously at hours 42, 48, and 54 after the beginning of MTX. In courses AA and BB, the dose of leucovorin at hour 42 was 30 mg/m 2 intravenously. In case of impaired MTX excretion, intensified leucovorin rescue was carried out as previously described. 4 (10) 119 (24) 221 (44) 16 (3) 17 (3) 56 (11) 23 (5) Response criteria
The response to the treatment was evaluated after each course of therapy. Follow-up studies were performed at 4-to 6-week intervals during the first 1.5 years. In patients with BM and/or CNS involvement, follow-up punctures of BM and/or CSF were performed only until the BM or the CNS, respectively, was cleared from blasts. Tumor failure was defined as a recurrence of lymphoma proven by biopsy, or regrowth of an incompletely resolved tumor, or persistence of BM blasts after the second course of therapy. Isolated BM relapse was based on 25% or more blasts in the BM. Isolated CNS relapse was based on the appearance of blasts in the CSF.
Event-free survival (EFS) was calculated from the day of diagnosis to an event (tumor failure, death for any reason, second malignancy) or to the date of last follow-up contact. Failure-free survival (FFS) was calculated from the day of diagnosis to treatment failure (tumor failure, death due to therapy) or to the date of last follow-up contact, while patients who experienced second malignancy were censored at the time of that event.
Analyses of EFS and FFS were performed using the Kaplan and Meier method with differences compared by the log-rank test. 21, 22 The 95% confidence interval (CI) for the Kaplan-Meier estimate of EFS and FFS was calculated using standard errors according to Greenwood. 23 In order to take into account prognostic factors when comparing FFS of patient subgroups, Cox regression analysis was used. 24 The statistical analysis was carried out using the SAS statistical program (SAS-PC, Version 6.12; SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Follow-up data were updated as of June 1, 2003 . Trial NHL-BFM95 was supervised by an external data safety and monitoring committee (DMC). The first aim of study NHL-BFM95 was to test whether the incidence of orointestinal mucositis grades III or IV can be reduced by shortening the duration of intravenous infusion of high-dose MTX from 24 hours to 4 hours, without impairment of the probability of FFS (pFFS). Patients were randomized to receive either MTX-24h or MTX-4h. Randomization was stratified by risk group. For safety reasons, the first question to be answered was: Is MTX-4h noninferior to MTX-24h? The end point of that analysis was the one-sided 95% CI for the difference of a one-year pFFS between the 2 arms. This test was planned as a per-protocol analysis; that is, only randomized patients who received therapy according to their randomized arm were analyzed. 25 Analysis was performed separately for branch R1, R2, and the combined branches R3 ϩ R4. MTX-4h was accepted to be noninferior to MTX-24h if the lower limit of the one-sided 95% CI for the difference of pFFS between randomized patients treated with MTX-4h and those treated with MTX-24h did not exceed Ϫ11% in risk group R2 and Ϫ17% in the combined risk groups R3 ϩ R4. The expected total number of randomized patients was 405 with a risk group distribution of 17%, 43%, 13%, and 27% for risk groups R1, R2, R3, and R4, respectively. With these expected numbers of patients for risk group R2, the power to prove noninferiority of MTX-4h was estimated to be 0.80 if the pFFS is 0.95 for the MTX-24h arm (type I error ϭ 5%, n ϭ 87 per arm). For the combined risk groups R3 ϩ R4, the test power was estimated to be 0.80 if the pFFS is 0.80 for the MTX-24h arm (type I error ϭ 5%, n ϭ 81 per arm). There was no planned test for risk group R1 because of the small number of patients and the extremely low number of expected events. 4 After the test for noninferiority, the second part of the study question was addressed: Is it possible to significantly reduce orointestinal toxicity by reducing the MTX infusion time from 24 hours to 4 hours? The end point of this analysis was the incidence of the maximum grade of mucositis per randomized arm. The analysis (Wilcoxon rank-sum test) was performed separately for risk group R1 (2 MTX-containing courses with MTX 1 g/m 2 ), risk group R2 (4 courses with MTX 1 g/m 2 ), and together for risk groups R3 ϩ R4 (4 MTXcontaining courses with MTX 5 g/m 2 ) with type I error equal to 5% for each test. For patients receiving courses including MTX 5 g/m 2 as intravenous infusion over 24 hours, an incidence of mucositis grade III or IV of 72% was expected based on observations in the preceding study NHL-BFM90. There were 2 interim analyses and a final analysis planned when 33%, 66%, and 100% of the expected total number of randomized patients would have a potential follow-up of at least one year. The overall alpha 0.05 was corrected according to O'Brien and Fleming for the first interim (P ϭ .0005), the second interim (P ϭ .014), and the final analysis (P ϭ .045). 26 The second aim of study NHL-BFM95 was to investigate, against the historical control of study NHL-BFM90, whether for patients in risk group R2 the dose of MTX can be reduced from 5 g/m 2 in study NHL-BFM90 to 1 g/m 2 in study NHL-BFM95 without impairment of pEFS. The end point of that analysis was the one-sided 95% CI for the difference of a 3-year pEFS between patients in risk group R2 in studies NHL-BFM90 and NHL-BFM95. Treatment with MTX 1 g/m 2 was accepted to be noninferior to the therapy with MTX 5 g/m 2 if the lower limit of the one-sided 95% CI for the difference in pEFS of patients in risk group R2 in study NHL-BFM95 and study NHL-BFM90 did not exceed Ϫ7%. This test was planned as a per-protocol analysis; that is, only patients allocated to risk group R2 who received R2 therapy were included in that analysis. 25 

Of the 505 eligible patients, 119 were girls and 386 were boys. The median age was 9.3 years (range, 1.4-19.7 years) . The diagnoses of patients are given in Table 2 . Table 3 lists the distribution of For personal use only. on September 7, 2017 . by guest www.bloodjournal.org From patients according to risk groups and stages: 48, 233, 82, and 142 patients were assigned to risk group R1, R2, R3, and R4, respectively. Of the 40 patients with CNS disease, 27 had CSF blasts, 9 had an intraparenchymal mass, and 4 patients had a cranial nerve palsy only. Of the boys, 11 had testicular disease. The median pretreatment LDH was 371 U/L (range, 57-46 340 U/L).
At a median follow-up of 3.3 years (range, 0.4-6.3 years), the 3-year pEFS was 89% Ϯ 1% (SE) for the total group (Figure 2) . The 3-year pEFS was 94% Ϯ 4%, 94% Ϯ 2%, 85% Ϯ 4%, and 81% Ϯ 3% for patients in risk groups R1, R2, R3, and R4, respectively ( Figure 3 ). pEFS according to stage is depicted in Figure 4 . There was no statistically significant difference between pEFS of patients with Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Patients with primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma had an inferior outcome, however (Table 2 ). Table 4 summarizes adverse events according to risk group and according to stage. One child in risk group R4 died early of tumor lysis syndrome. A total of 10 children died of sepsis (n ϭ 6), invasive mycosis (n ϭ 3), or meningitis (n ϭ 1) after the first (n ϭ 6), the third (n ϭ 1), and the fourth (n ϭ 3) course of therapy. There were 39 children who suffered from tumor failure. Local manifestations were the most frequent site of tumor failure followed by BM and new sites ( Table 2) . While on therapy, 11 patients suffered from tumor failure; 1 of them had persistent blasts after the second course of therapy. In 27 patients, tumor failure occurred after completion of chemotherapy within one year from diagnosis. There was one relapse 1.3 years after diagnosis. There were 3 patients who developed a second malignancy. There were 2 patients with BL who developed a second BL of different clonality 2.9 and 3.4 years after the first disease. One patient with DLBCL suffered a malignant melanoma. One BL patient suffered from a late recurrence 3.3 years after the first diagnosis. There was no material available for analysis regarding clonal identity or difference between the first and second malignant growths.

The 3-year pEFS for the 40 CNS-positive patients was 69% Ϯ 7%. One patient died of infection (Table 4 ). Of the remaining 39 patients, 11 suffered from progression, 7 of them within the CNS.
Of the patients, 15 in risk group R3 and 16 in R4 received second-look surgery due to residual tumor after the fifth course. The histologic examination revealed viable residual tumor in only one patient of R4. This patient underwent ASCT and remained free of relapse (follow-up, 42 months). Another 4 patients (1 in R3, 3 in R4) underwent ASCT after completion of chemotherapy without undergoing second-look surgery. Although not foreseen in the protocol, 17 patients in risk group R2 underwent second-look surgery or biopsy after the fourth course of therapy due to a persistent tumor remnant. In 2 of these 17 cases, vital residual tumor was found. ASCT was performed in both patients, but one patient died of progressive disease thereafter.
Of the 505 patients, 364 were randomized to receive either MTX-4h (n ϭ 180) or MTX-24h (n ϭ 184) ( Table 5 ). Of the patients randomized to receive MTX-4h, 10 chose to receive MTX-24h. One patient randomized to receive MTX-24h chose to NA indicates not applicable. *Not randomized due to patients/guardians refusal or by physicians in charge. †Because there was a trend for inferior results in the randomized arm MTX-4h, after the first and second interim analysis randomization was halted in blinded fashion for the time period until approval and recommendation of the external data safety and monitoring committee and the study committee regarding continuation or stopping of the trial. During this period, all requests for randomization of patients were answered with the allocation MTX-24 h.
‡In risk groups R3 and R4, randomization was stopped after the second interim analysis. For personal use only. on September 7, 2017 . by guest www.bloodjournal.org From receive MTX-4h. In 63 cases (12%), patients/guardians did not give consent for randomization, preferring instead to choose the treatment arm. For the following reason, 20 patients were not randomized: In the first and second interim analysis, there was a trend toward inferior results in the randomized arm MTX-4h in risk groups R3 ϩ R4. Therefore, randomization was temporarily halted in a blinded fashion, pending approval and recommendation whether to stop or to continue the trial. In these periods, all requests of the participating clinics for randomization of patients were answered with the allocation MTX-24h.
In the second interim analysis in the combined risk groups R3 ϩ R4, the incidence of tumor failure was 5 times higher in the randomized arm MTX-4h than in the randomized arm MTX-24h, while in both arms 2 patients had died of toxicity. Because of this unexpected and alarming observation, in accordance with the DMC we changed from a test for noninferiority in pFFS to a log-rank test for difference. Because for a test of difference, an intent-to-treat analysis is the most conservative approach (not a per-protocol analysis), we also changed from the per-protocol analysis set of patients to an intent-to-treat set. 25 pFFS at one year was 91% Ϯ 4% for 56 patients with a minimal potential follow-up of one year and randomized to receive MTX-24h. In contrast, the one-year pFFS was 75% Ϯ 6% for 49 patients with a minimal potential follow-up of one year and randomized to receive MTX-4h (P ϭ .03). Therefore, after consultation with the DMC, the randomization was stopped for patients in risk groups R3 ϩ R4 after the second interim analysis. The 57 patients thereafter enrolled in risk group R3 (n ϭ 17) and risk group R4 (n ϭ 40) and received MTX-24h. For patients in risk groups R1 and R2, however, randomization was continued until the end of the planned accrual period.
The final analysis was performed after a median follow-up of 3.3 years (range, 0.4-6.3 years). Table 6 shows the distribution of patient characteristics per randomized arm and according to risk group. The MTX serum concentrations at 24, 42, and 48 hours after the start of the MTX intravenous infusion were higher in patients receiving MTX-24h compared with those receiving MTX-4h (Table 7) . There was no statistically significant difference of intervals between 2 subsequent courses in either randomization group (Table 8) .
Results of the intent-to-treat analysis are given in Table 9 and in Figure 5A -C. The one-year pFFS for patients randomized to receive MTX-4h versus MTX-24h was as follows: in the total group, 88% Ϯ 2% (n ϭ 180) versus 95% Ϯ 2% (n ϭ 184) *Indicates the number of hours over which the infusion was given. †After the beginning of MTX intravenous infusion.
(P ϭ .015; Figure 5A ); in risk group R1, 95% Ϯ 5% (n ϭ 21) versus 100% (n ϭ 19) (P ϭ 0.34); in risk group R2, 95% Ϯ 2% (n ϭ 93) versus 96% Ϯ 2% (n ϭ 96) (P ϭ .71) (hazard ratio, 1.28; 95% CI, 0.34-4.78) ( Figure 5B) ; and in the combined risk groups R3 ϩ R4 77% Ϯ 5% (n ϭ 66) versus 93% Ϯ 3% (n ϭ 69) (P ϭ .0077; hazard ratio, 3.58; 95% CI, 1.31-9.79) ( Figure 5C ). In univariate analysis of patients of the combined risk groups R3 ϩ R4, female sex (P ϭ .03) and age older than 10 years (P ϭ .01) were associated with inferior pFFS. In a Cox regression model with the covariables sex, age younger than 10 years versus 10 years or older, and risk group R3 versus R4, the hazard ratio of the randomized arm MTX-4h was 3.59 (95% CI, 1.30-9.93; P ϭ .014; Table 10 ). This result is very close to the univariate analysis.
Excluded from the per-protocol analysis were 11 patients who rejected the randomized arm but instead chose to receive the alternative MTX schedule (Table 5 ). In risk group R2 (MTX dose, 1 g/m 2 ), the one-year pFFS was 94% Ϯ 2% for 88 randomized patients who received MTX-4h compared with 96% Ϯ 2% for 95 randomized patients who received MTX-24h (hazard ratio, 1.34; 95% CI, 0.36-4.99). The lower limit of the one-sided 95.5% CI for the difference (pFFS MTX-4h Ϫ pFFS MTX-24h, alpha corrected for multiple testing) was Ϫ6.8%. This was above the predetermined loss of Ϫ11%, which was considered still to be acceptable.
In the combined risk groups R3 ϩ R4 (MTX dose, 5 g/m 2 ), the one-year pFFS was 77% Ϯ 5% for 62 randomized patients who received MTX-4h (12 tumor failures) compared with 93% Ϯ 3% for 69 randomized patients who received MTX-24h (2 tumor failures). In both arms, 3 patients each died of toxicity. The hazard ratio was 3.56 (95% CI, 1.29-9.82). The lower limit of the one-sided 95% CI for the difference (pFFS MTX-4h Ϫ pFFS MTX-24h) was Ϫ25%, which was far lower than the predetermined level of Ϫ17%. This means that the possible loss in the efficacy is too high.
In all risk groups, the incidence of the maximum grade of mucositis was significantly lower in randomized patients who received MTX-4h compared with randomized patients who received MTX24h (Table 11 ). The frequencies of main toxicities grades III/IV per total number of courses administered are given as a descriptive analysis in Table 12 .
Comparison of pEFS for patients in risk group R2 against the historical control group in study NHL-BFM90
The proportion of patients in risk group R2 was 40% in study NHL-BFM90 and 46% in study NHL-BFM95 (Table 13 ). In studies BFM90 and BFM95, 13 and 11 patients, respectively, received treatment differing from risk group R2. Thus, 154 and 222 R2 patients of studies NHL-BFM90 and NHL-BFM95, respectively, were evaluable for comparison. In study BFM90, the 3-year pEFS was 97% Ϯ 1% for the 154 patients of risk group R2 who received R2 therapy and was 95 Ϯ 2% for the 222 patients in study BFM95 ( Figure 6 ). The lower limit of the one-sided 95% CI for the difference in pEFS of risk group R2 in study NHL-BFM95 (MTX dose, 1 g/m 2 ) minus pEFS of risk group R2 in study NHL-BFM95 (MTX dose, 5 g/m 2 ) was Ϫ4.5%. The distribution of patient characteristics was comparable in studies NHL-BFM90 and NHL-BFM95 with one exception. In study NHL-BFM95, the percentage of BL patients was lower than in study NHL-BFM90, while the proportion of patients with DLBCL was higher. The 3-year pEFS for patients with BL or DLBCL was comparable in both studies, however (Table 13) . Tumor failure, no. (no. alive after rescue) 1 (1) 0 4 (2) 4 (0) 12 (2) 2 (0) 17 (5) Intent-to-treat analysis. Log-rank P ϭ .34 for R1, .72 for R2, .0077 for R3 ϩ R4, and .015 for all.
Favorable results have been reported from previous studies on childhood and adolescent B-cell neoplasms. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] The toxicity of these protocols was considerable, however. Therefore, study NHL-BFM95 aimed at reducing treatment-related toxicity without jeopardizing treatment outcome. The 3-year pEFS for the 505 eligible patients was 89% Ϯ 1% and thus comparable with the results of previous studies. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] The treatment proved equally efficacious for all subtypes of childhood and adolescent B-NHL, with the possible exception of primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma. Recent reports support the unique nature of this large cell lymphoma, which may need a specifically adapted treatment (eg, the high local failure rate [ Table 2 ] may ask for a role of local radiotherapy). 27 High-dose MTX is a key component of most protocols for childhood and adolescent B-cell neoplasms. However, the dose of MTX, the administration schedule, as well as the leucovorin rescue vary considerably between these protocols. All these parameters, especially the duration of the continuous intravenous infusion of MTX, may have a substantial influence on efficacy and toxicity. [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] In our previous trials, orointestinal toxicity appeared to be the most important therapy-associated toxicity, mainly attributable to high-dose MTX given as continuous intravenous infusion over 24 hours. 4 Therefore, the first aim of study NHL-BFM95 was to test in a randomized trial whether the incidence of orointestinal mucositis grade III/IV can be reduced by shortening the time of intravenous infusion of high-dose MTX from 24 hours to 4 hours, without impairment of the probability of FFS. Indeed, the present study showed an impressive reduction of severe orointestinal mucositis in patients having received MTX-4h compared with MTX-24h in all therapy branches.
However, in terms of efficacy, significant differences were observed regarding outcome and MTX infusion regimen in different risk groups. Regarding pFFS, the 4-hour infusion of high-dose MTX was noninferior to the 24-hour infusion for patients in risk groups R1 and R2 (55% of the total patient population). In risk groups R3 ϩ R4, however, pFFS was significantly worse for patients having received MTX as a 4-hour infusion. The second interim analysis of the trial showed a 5-fold excess of tumor failure if MTX was administered over 4 hours compared with a 24-hour infusion. As a consequence of this alarming finding, randomization was omitted for patients in risk groups R3 ϩ R4 after the second interim analysis. In the final analysis, pFFS of patients randomized to receive MTX 5 g/m 2 as infusion over 4 hours was significantly (P ϭ .008) lower compared with patients randomized to receive MTX 5 g/m 2 as infusion over 24 hours. This difference in pFFS was not attributable to differences in patient characteristics between the 2 randomized arms. In a multivariate Cox regression analysis (including the covariables risk group, age, and sex), randomization in therapy arm MTX-4h was a significant risk factor for tumor failure. The leucovorin rescue as well as the application of all other chemotherapeutic agents were identical in both randomized arms. We conclude, therefore, that the difference in treatment efficacy between the 2 randomized arms for patients in risk groups R3 ϩ R4 can be attributed to the different schedule of intravenous MTX infusion. For personal use only. on September 7, 2017 . by guest www.bloodjournal.org From
The observed difference of the impact of MTX administration schedules on efficacy for patients in risk groups R3 ϩ R4 compared with those in risk groups R1 and R2 is intriguing. Patients in risk groups R3 ϩ R4 differ from those in risk groups R1 and R2 primarily with respect to the higher tumor mass, which, in turn, might be associated with a higher proportion of multiple resistant cells within the tumor cell population. 28 Because cytotoxicity of MTX is time dependent, 12 longer exposure times of these resistant cells during a 24-hour infusion of MTX might be associated with improved clearance of these cells and, thus, might explain the higher pFFS of patients with high tumor load and long MTX infusion. In fact, this observation may be interpreted as strong evidence for the efficacy of MTX as such in the treatment of B-cell neoplasms of childhood and adolescents. According to the Goldie Coldman postulation, 28 the lower tumor mass of the patients in risk groups R1 and R2 might be associated with a lower proportion of multiple resistant cells within the tumor cell population. Hence, these cells might be eradicated with a less efficacious schedule of MTX. On the other hand, the noninferiority of the short MTX infusion regimen compared with the long infusion regimen in terms of pFFS for patients in risk groups R1 and R2 may reflect that the impact of MTX on the overall therapeutic success may be of lesser importance in patients with lower tumor load compared with those with higher tumor masses.
Comparison of treatment outcome of patients in risk group R2 in the present trial NHL-BFM95 versus the previous study NHL-BFM90 supports the following hypothesis: pEFS for patients in risk group R2 did not differ between trials NHL-BFM90 and NHL-BFM95 despite a reduction of the dose of MTX to 1 g/m 2 in study NHL-BFM95 compared with 5 g/m 2 in the preceding trial NHL-BFM90. Furthermore, for this patient subgroup, intensification of chemotherapy in case of incomplete tumor regression after 2 therapy courses as performed in study NHL-BFM90 seems to be dispensable with the exception of single cases with very poor response to treatment. 4 Our data suggest that a favorable balance of efficacy and toxicity is possible for patients with B-NHL stage I, II, and III (LDH Ͻ 500 U/L) (55% of all cases of B-cell neoplasms of childhood and adolescence). They have a pFFS of 95% with only 2 (R1) or 4 (R2) 5-day courses of chemotherapy including MTX 1 g/m 2 as intravenous infusion over 4 hours. Mucositis grade III/IV was observed after only 6% of 374 courses, while infections grade III were observed after only 2% of 374 courses. However, further reduction of therapy in this patient subgroup may be crucial as long as no proven salvage regimen for relapsed patients is available. Surprisingly all 3 second malignancies occurred in risk groups R1 and R2 with less intense chemotherapy.
For patients with advanced disease, however, FFS rates comparable with the excellent results in the French study LMB 89 6 were obtained only with the courses including MTX 5 g/m 2 as intravenous infusion over 24 hours. In study LMB 89, however, high-dose MTX was given as intravenous infusion over only 3 or 4 hours depending on treatment branch. Although almost the same drugs were used in the LMB and the BFM strategy, the weight of some drugs such as anthracyclines, etoposide, and alkylating agents differed considerably. This may have outweighed the effect of the short infusion time of MTX in the LMB regimen. This assumption is supported by the observation that the acute toxicity profiles of the COPADM courses used in study LMB 89, including MTX 3 g/m 2 and 8 g/m 2 as infusion over 3 and 4 hours, respectively, are similar to those of the courses AA and BB in study NHL-BFM95, including MTX 5 g/m 2 as infusion over 24 hours. 6 Interestingly, in study NHL-BFM95, the pFFS of patients in the combined risk groups R3 ϩ R4 who received MTX 5 g/m 2 as intravenous infusion over 24 hours was higher compared with the corresponding patients in study NHL-BFM90 (risk group R3 of study NHL-BFM90 was subdivided into risk groups R3 ϩ R4 by LDH Ͻ or Ͼ 1000 U/L in study NHL-BFM95). 4 In trial NHL-BFM95, all patients in risk groups R3 ϩ R4 received course CC including high-dose cytarabine and etoposide. High-dose cytarabine/ etoposide was described as effective even in relapsed B-NHL patients. 29 For comparison, in our preceding study NHL-BFM90 only 30% of the corresponding patients received course CC. Moreover, the dose of cytarabine and etoposide was increased in course CC of study NHL-BFM95.
To our knowledge, study NHL-BFM95 is the first randomized controlled trial describing the impact of different MTX administration regimens on patient outcome and toxicity in the therapy of NHL. The results and conclusions from this trial may help to further optimize treatment not only for children and adolescents with B-cell NHL/AL, but also for adults suffering from highly aggressive B-cell neoplasms. Furthermore, experience from this trial shows that changes in administration schedules of wellestablished drugs may have profound and unexpected impact on both efficacy and side effects of chemotherapy.
BLOOD, 1 FEBRUARY 2005 ⅐ VOLUME 105, NUMBER 3 For personal use only. on September 7, 2017 . by guest www.bloodjournal.org From
Research is increasingly aimed at identifying genetic determinants of stress vulnerability as risk factors for mental disorders. It has been proposed that dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, a key system in the biological stress response, is a component of vulnerability for psychiatric disorders (Walker and Diforio, 1997) . Genetic factors account for approximately 50% of variability in cortisol secretion (Linkowski et al., 1993) , a measure of HPA activity. Thus, it appears that some genes, in concert with other genetic and environmental factors (van Os et al., 2003) , determine individual differences in HPA activity. Dopamine has also been implicated in the stress response (Laruelle, 2000) , and one of the genes responsible for dopamine metabolism, Catechol-O-Methyltransferase (COMT) is among the genes theorized to impact stress-sensitivity (Zubieta et al., 2003) . COMT Val 108/158 Met is a functional polymorphism (i.e., a single nucleotide involving an amino acid change from Valine (Val) to Methionine (Met) at codon 158) affecting enzyme activity. Val homozygosity is associated with 3-4 fold higher enzyme activity than Met homozygosity (Mannisto and Kaakkola, 1999; Lachman et al., 1996) , and because the alleles are codominant, heterozygotes are intermediate (Männisto and Kaakkola, 1999; Lachman et al., 1996) . Accordingly, Val/Val, Val/Met and Met/Met genotypes correspond, in theory, to highest, intermediary, and lowest dopamine degradation, respectively. Two mechanisms have been suggested for COMT allelic variants to alter HPA function (Oswald et al., 2004) . First, because low-activity COMT (Met variant) is associated with higher catecholinergic activity, it would be expected to be linked with greater hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) release. Second, more pronounced μ-opioid receptor binding potential has been observed in response to stress in humans who are COMT Met/ Met homozygous (Zubieta et al., 2003) , suggesting that the low-activity form of COMT could alter HPA activity indirectly through influencing DA-mediated regulation of opioid neurotransmission.
Several studies implicate COMT Val 108/158 Met in stress-sensitivity, including COMT modulation of HPA function. Among healthy individuals, greater stress-sensitivity among COMT Met homozygotes compared to Val-carriers is suggested by 1) higher plasma ACTH and cortisol response to psychosocial stress (Jabbi, 2007) , 2) greater cortisol response to naloxone, an opioid antagonist (Oswald et al., 2004) , 3) higher sensory and affective responses to pain, and more negative internal affective state, (Zubieta et al., 2003) , and increased limbic and prefrontal activation in response to unpleasant stimuli, with a greater propensity to negative mood (Smolka et al., 2004) .
Data from clinical populations are mixed. To date, we know of only one study examining COMT genotype and HPA activity in a clinical risk sample (N=25, Jabbi, 2007) , and the findings indicate that, among individuals at familial high-risk for depression, COMT genotype was not associated with cortisol response. However, a study of self-reported symptoms found that Met homozygote psychotic patients reported more negative affect and psychotic symptoms in response to daily stress compared to other genotypes (van Winkel et al., 2008) . In contrast, another study examining normal military inductees (19-24 years; N=2243) found Val-carriers (compared to Met homozygotes) to be more sensitive to army induction training stress as reflected by higher psychosis symptom ratings (Stefanis et al., 2007) .
Adolescence is a critical period for the onset of mental disorders, and it is also characterized by heightened stress sensitivity, including a marked increase in cortisol secretion (Walker, 2002) . Increased cortisol secretion during adolescence has been demonstrated in crosssectional (Kenny et al., 1966; Kiess et al 1995; Lupien et al., 2002) and longitudinal (Walker et al., 2001; Walker et al., 2002; Wajs-Kuto et al., 1999) studies, and has been implicated in the escalating risk of mental disorders during this period. Increases in cortisol levels occur with each year of age, beginning around 13 and may extend into the early twenties. To date, no studies have explored the modulating role of COMT on cortisol during adolescence.
The present study tested the hypothesis that COMT genotype would be associated with cortisol secretion in normal and at-risk adolescents: specifically, that COMT genotype would be linked in a dose-response manner, such that Met homozygotes would have the highest salivary cortisol levels, followed by heterozygotes, then Val homozygotes. In addition, the relation of COMT genotype with longitudinal changes in cortisol was examined.
The present sample is a subgroup of participants from the Emory University adolescent development project, a longitudinal study of youth at-risk for Axis I mental disorders. Data on COMT genotype and salivary cortisol (baseline and two follow-ups) were available for 63 adolescents, ages 12 to 18 years (mean=14.52, SD=1.87). Follow-up endocrine assessments were conducted at 7-10 months and one year later. (See Trotman et al. (2006) for a description of the sample.) Recruitment focused on adolescents with DSM-IV-TR schizotypal personality disorder (SPD) (n = 11 males and 6 females) and other Axis II syndromes (n=16 males and 13 females) linked with risk for developing Axis I disorders, especially psychosis; together, this constituted the high-risk group. Healthy adolescents (n=7 males and 10 females) did not meet criteria for any DSM-IV-TR disorder. No participant met criteria for an Axis I disorder at baseline. There were no diagnostic group differences in sex [χ 2 (2)=1.926, p=0.382], age [F(2)=.148, p=0.862], or ethnicity [χ 2 (6)=6.819, p=0.338]. Assent and written consent was obtained from all participants and a parent, in accordance with guidelines of the Emory University Institutional Review Board.
The Structured Interview of DSM-IV Personality Disorders (SIDP-IV; Pfohl et al., 1997) and the Structured Clinical Interview for Axis I DSM-IV Disorders (SCID-I/P; First et al., 1998) were administered. Diagnosticians demonstrated high inter-rater reliabilities (Kappa > 0.80).
A detailed description of methods for salivary collection and assay of cortisol can be found in Mittal et al. (2007) . The current analyses used the first three cortisol samples, which were collected in the morning before lunch. The measure of cortisol at baseline (upon the initial assessment) and each of the two follow-ups index an average of the individual's cortisol level over an approximate 1-2 hour period in the morning, when levels are at a relative peak in accord with the natural diurnal rhythm. Participants were instructed not to ingest products containing caffeine or engage in vigorous physical activity or exercise prior to sample collection.
Participants provided saliva samples in the Oragene DNA Self-Collection kit (DNA Genotek Inc., Ottawa, Canada, Rylander-Rudqvist et al., 2006) . DNA was extracted from saliva by using the Qiagen M48 automated extraction system. COMT Val-Met (rs4680) genotypes were determined using the 5'-exonuclease (TaqMan®) method. The assay kits and genotyping reagents were ordered from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA). Genotyping was performed on an ABI 7900HT system, with samples arrayed in 384-well plates. For the total sample, genotype frequencies were Met/Met = 11, Val/Met = 30 and Val/Val = 22; there was no deviation from Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (chisq, 2 d.f. = .02, p = .88). There were no significant differences in distribution of allelic frequencies by diagnostic group [χ 2 (4)=3.879, p=0.423] or racial/ethnic group [χ 2 (6)=9.273, p=0.159].
Consistent with previous reports, the present sample showed a developmental increase in cortisol secretion, however, the magnitude of the increase varied by genotype. Mean cortisol by time and genotype is illustrated in Figure 1 Group differences in cortisol as a function of genotype were also examined using the average of the mean cortisol values across the 3 assessments (Baseline and Follow-ups 1 and 2). Accordingly, there were no significant differences across Met homozygotes (mean=. 5812, SD=.1547), Met heterozygotes (mean=.5505, SD=.2364), and Val homozygotes (mean=.5018, SD=.1647) [F(2)=.666, p>.10)].
Percentage change in cortisol levels at each of the follow-ups relative to baseline was also examined, as another method towards illustrating the pattern of longitudinal change in cortisol by gentoype. Percentage change values were calculated by dividing mean cortisol at each of the follow-ups by mean cortisol at baseline, respectively, and then multiplying by 100. Results indicated no significant genetic group differences ( Consistent with previous reports, Met/Met genotype was the least frequent, with only 3 such individuals in the healthy control group. Thus, for within-diagnostic group comparisons, Met heterozygotes (Val/Met) and homozygotes (Met/Met) were combined. Further, due to the small number of subjects when participants were divided by both genotype and diagnostic group, the psychiatric diagnostic groups were combined into one high-risk group for the initial comparison. This yielded 32 at-risk Met-carriers, 14 at-risk Val homozygotes, 9 healthy control Met-carriers, and 8 healthy control Val homozygotes.
Within group comparisons revealed that, among healthy controls, Met-carriers showed significant increases in mean cortisol from baseline to Follow-up 1 [t(7)=-3.124, p=.017] and a trend at Follow-up 2 [t(6)=-2.297, p=.061]. Among Val/Val healthy controls, there were no significant increases.
Among high-risk adolescents, Met-carriers showed a trend level increase in mean cortisol at Follow-up 2 compared to baseline [t (29) 
In summary, consistent with previous reports, this study revealed higher cortisol levels in COMT Met homozygotes compared to Val homozygotes and Met heterozygotes. However, the genotype-associated differences in cortisol were observed at Follow-up 2 only, not Baseline or Follow-up 1. The absence of a relation at Baseline and Follow-up 1, together with our finding of longitudinal increases in cortisol levels (that are stronger for Met homozygotes alone than all Met-carriers at Follow-up 2, and weaker for Met homozygotes alone than all Met-carriers at Follow-up 1), suggests the possibility that COMT Val/Met genotype modulates longitudinal changes in cortisol during adolescent maturation, a period marked by a variety of neurodevelopmental changes and increasing risk for the onset of mental disorder (Sowell et al., 2007; Walker, 2002) . We hypothesize that such an association reflects lower COMT activity in Met carriers, which in turn alters regulation of HPA function by dopamine, and possibly, norepinephrine. This study is unique in that it is the first to consider the modulating role of genetic factors, namely COMT, in regulating cortisol secretion specifically among youth at heightened risk for psychosis. Findings have implications for understanding the neurodevelopment of psychiatric disorders, particularly psychosis, and the advancement of novel treatment strategies and routes for prevention of mental disorders. One study limitation is the small sample size, which could result in false positives. Thus, replication of findings using a larger sample is warranted. Large-scale longitudinal studies examining the relation of genotype with neurohormonal development in adolescents may prove fruitful in elucidating heritable factors influencing the adolescent maturational process involved in the onset of Axis I disorders. Mean Salivary Cortisol Across a One-Year Period by COMT (rs4680) Genotype for the Total Sample
Films of collagen, the most abundant mammalian protein 1 , are sought for prosthetic coatings, as support matrices for cell growth, and for permeable membranes. 2 However, many in vitro collagen films are substrate supported 2-5 which limits their use as membranes. Our results demonstrate that two independently recognized in vitro polymer aggregation variables, electric field [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] and pH, 1, 11, 12 can be used in concert to form suspended collagen network films, without the presence of a supporting substrate. This approach could benefit lab-on-a-chip technologies 13 for rational placement of ion separation membranes in microfluidic devices.
Collagen's function in the body is intimately related to its structural transformations through aggregation. Conveniently, the hierarchical collagen structures observed from in vivo 14, 15 collagen aggregation can be replicated in vitro 11, 14 , without need of biological assistance from enzymes or growth factors. Collagen monomers can form oligomers that grow linearly and laterally and cross-link to create fibrils 15 . Alternate aggregation pathways produce different aggregate or fibril morphologies 1, 15, 16 .
Controlled collagen aggregation requires management of electrostatics, sterics, and hydrophobicity, all of which can be affected by pH 1, 14, 15 . Adding an electric field places further importance on electrostatics and charge.
Collagen's surface charge is pH-dependent due to amino acid protonation at acidic pH values and deprotonation at alkaline pH values 17 . Collagen, when net charged, migrates in an electric field like any charged polymer 7, 8 , but beyond that, collagen's behavior in an electric field has not been widely investigated 10, 17 , despite increasing use of electrochemical methods to create biopolymer and biocomposite coatings 2,18 . Collagen is electrochemically inactive over a wide range of applied potentials 19 . However, a sufficiently large applied voltage to its aqueous supporting electrolyte causes alkaline conditions near the cathode, due to the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER, with E 0 = -0.83 vs.
normal hydrogen electrode (NHE)), and acidic pH near the anode (oxygen evolution reaction, with E 0 = +1.71 vs. NHE), which can influence collagen migration and aggregation. Reduction of ambient dissolved oxygen also contributes to the pH change near the cathode. By exposing collagen monomers to the simultaneous pH gradient and electric field produced in an electrochemical cell, we have developed a method to control the spatial aggregation of collagen in the electrolyte, without need for a supporting substrate.
Electrolytes, prepared using ultrapure water (Barnstead, 18.2 MΩ), contained type I collagen monomers (final concentration 0.07 -0.30 mg/mL from 3 mg/mL Vitrogen stock solution, Inamed Biomaterials) and sufficient NaOH and HCl solutions (EMD chemicals, ACS reagent grade) to adjust the pH to the desired value (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) . Stainless steel sheet electrodes provided an electric field of 5-10 V over 1.0-2.5 cm, yielding a current density of -0.7 to -1.2 mA/cm 2 . These voltages are large relative to the potentials required for the HER, oxygen evolution and oxygen reduction reactions. Macroscopic 2 films were formed in a glass electrochemical cell designed and built in-house (2.5 cm x 2.5 cm x 1 cm, 3.5 mL volume), while smaller films were prepared in glass (1.1 mm ID) or polyethylene (1.57 or 0.86 mm ID) capillaries, 1 cm long. We note that, while it is possible for peroxide to form at the cathode during the hydrogen and oxygen reduction processes, we do not observe any film degradation due to the presence of such strong oxidants over the time scales of our experiments (up to several hours).
Optical microscopy investigations employed a Leica DM2500 with polarized light capability. Atomic force microscopy studies with an Asylum Research MFP-3D used silicon cantilevers (Au back coating, force constant ~ 0.3 N/m, Mikromasch). Raman scattering spectroscopy data were obtained with a Jobin Yvon Horiba LabRAM in the confocal configuration (532 nm excitation).
Within minutes of exposing a pH-adjusted electrolyte of collagen monomers (0.3 mg/mL) to an electric field (3-20 V/cm), a collagen film -visible by eye -forms in the electrolyte, parallel to the anode and cathode, and with its edges anchored to the container walls, whether glass or polyethylene.
Videos and representative current versus time data taken during the film formation process are available as Supporting Information.
Our electrosynthesis method for forming collagen films controls three essential stages of collagen aggregation: localization, organization, and association. The coexistence of the electric field and pH gradient enables a spatially localized region of high collagen concentration through a serendipitous combination of pH-dependent surface charge and the resulting electromobility it induces. When the electric field is first applied, collagen migrates away from the anode 10 to build up a critical mass of collagen near the middle of the cell. As the collagen migrates closer to the pH region that matches its isoelectric point, it approaches net neutral charge and is less affected by the electric field. These changes in surface charge distribution impact charge association and polymer alignment 6, 10 . 
wetted. They are robust enough to be handled with tweezers. Optical micrographs of a dried, partially folded film portray the sheet-like nature of the film (Fig. 1c) , and higher magnifications (Fig. 1d) highlight the complex microstructure of the collagen sheets. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) studies show that air-drying reduces film thickness from ~100 µm to 0.6±0.2 µm. AFM images presented in the Supplemental Information show continuation of the mesh-like structure on the micrometer length scale. The aggregational heterogeneity evident in the Raman data suggests a time-dependent conversion from non-specific monomer aggregates to collagen fibrils during electrosynthesis. Early in film formation, it is possible to partially or wholly dissolve the film and reform it at a different location in the electrochemical cell simply by reversing the polarity of the applied electric field. However, films formed for longer times show incomplete or minimal dissolution upon field reversal, suggesting that more robust and massive fibrils 21 exist after prolonged exposure to electric field and pH gradients.
Despite the mixture of monomeric and fibrillar collagen, film formation and function is quite reliable when three key experimental parameters are controlled First, there exists a collagen concentration threshold below which no film-like aggregation occurs, dependent on the volume of electrolyte relative to the surface area of the desired collagen film. Surface area to volume ratios near 1 cm 2 : 1 mL, consistent with the conditions used to produce the films shown in Fig. 1 , required collagen concentrations of 0.10-0.30 mg/mL. Second, a sufficiently large electric field is essential for spatially controlled aggregation. Earlier studies that employed pH gradients in the absence of an electric field 12 show limited OH -diffusion away from the working electrode (< 50 mm) even after hours of HER. As a result, the optimal pH region for film formation is so close to the cathode surface that hydrogen bubbles from the HER physically disrupt film formation. Fig. 3 is a representative image that shows the reproducibility of film positioning. These anchored films can be reliably positioned in small channels where manually inserting membranes would be extremely difficult, as the sub-millimter capillaries shown in Figures 1 and 3 demonstrate. Thus, there is promise for using electrosynthesis to place collagen membranes in 6 microfluidic devices 13 with either parallel plate or more complicated electrode geometries. Fig. 4 shows that the functionality of such membranes could include maintaining pH gradients or other ion separation. The possibility of size selectivity for larger particles is also intriguing, and experiments (described in more detail in the Supporting Information) have shown that colloidal silica spheres (400-500 nm diameter) do not diffuse readily through these collagen membranes. Thus, suspended electrosynthesized collagen films offer exciting possibilities for lab-on-a-chip technologies. 
Arabidopsis thaliana, similar to most crop plants, is a monocarpic species that undergoes whole plant senescence to maximize energy input into reproductive structures. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of nutrient recycling during leaf senescence is critical for the production of high yielding crops. Global gene expression has been characterized in senescent Arabidopsis tissue [1, 2, 3, 4] , and senescence up-regulated genes (SURGs) are enriched for autophagy, response to reactive oxygen species, chlorophyll and lipid catabolism as well as carbohydrate and nitrogen transport. Senescence downregulated genes (SDRGs) are enriched for cytoplasmic protein synthesis as well as chloroplast functions such as light harvesting, carbon fixation, and photorespiration. A leaf senescence database compiles senescence associated genes and orthologs from numerous plant species [5] . Transcription factors that play a role in these global changes in gene expression have been identified. Genetic and biochemical evidence support a role for WRKY53 (Locus:2128514) and NAC family members VNI2 (Locus:2179877) and AtNAP (Locus:2007166) as positive regulators of senescence [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] , and microarray analysis reveals over-representation for the AP2-EREBP, bZIP, C3H, CCAAT, NAC and WRKY transcription factor families as senescence progresses [1] .
Transcription factors can recruit histone modifying enzymes to specific promoter regions [11] and alterations in histone structure have been shown to be important for the vegetative to reproductive transition in Arabidopsis [12] . The floral repressor gene, FLC (Locus:2184118), is silenced during vernalization, a 40 day cold treatment, when activating H2BK143ub1, H3K4me3 and H3K36me3 histone marks are removed from FLC and replaced with silencing H3R3sme, H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 histone marks. FLC is reactivated in the globular stage of embryogenesis in a process that requires replacement of H2A with the H2AZ histone variant [13] . Endosperm development is regulated via genomic imprinting which utilizes histone modification and DNA methylation to silence maternal or paternal alleles [14] . In rice, expression of genes important for brassinosteroid synthesis and signaling are dependent on SDG725, an H3K36 methyltransferase [15] . In addition to development, histone modifications accompany changes in gene expression in response to deetiolation [16] and abiotic stresses including drought, cold, salt and hypoxia [17] .
Dynamic chromatin modifications may also be important for the changes in gene expression associated with senescence. Decondensation of heterochromatin occurs in the early stages of Arabidopsis leaf senescence and overexpression of SUVH2 (Locus:2051083), an H3K9 methyltransferase which promotes the formation of ectopic heterochromatin, has pleiotropic phenotypic effects which include a delay in senescence [18] . Low-level overexpression of a chromatin-modifying AT-hook protein, ORE7/ESC (Locus:2037350), also resulted in delayed senescence [19] . In yeast, worms, flies and mammals, the sirtuin family of histone deacetylases function to prevent early senescence by deacetylation of H3K9 in a suite of promoters controlled by NF-kB [20] . Although the mechanism has not been reported, the Arabidopsis histone deacetylase mutant, hda6 (Locus:2162017), also has increased leaf longevity [21] .
This work focuses on two histone modifications, H3K4me3 and H3K27me3. Trimethylation of H3K4 is catalyzed by the COMPASS-like protein complexes which form a scaffold for different SET-domain methyltransferases [22] . H3K4me3 marks have been evaluated on a genome-wide scale using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) followed by hybridization to highdensity genomic arrays [23] , and found to associate at and just downstream of the transcription start site (TSS) of expressed genes. This is similar to humans where H3K4me3 is associated with active genes near the TSS [24] . In Arabidopsis, the Pol IIassociating factor 1 complex (Paf1C) guides H3K4me3 marks to the 59-end of a subset of actively transcribed genes by linking elongating Pol II with histone methyltransferases after ubiquitination of H2B [25] , however this mechanism is not used for activation of all genes since H2BK143Ub1 precedes H3K4 trimethylation for some, but not all, Arabidopsis genes [26] .
Trimethylation of H3K27 in plants, is catalyzed by the Polycomb-group protein complex 2 (PRC2) [27, 28] , and is found to be associated with highly tissue-specific genes when they are silenced. H3K27me3 is enriched within the body of the gene from 25% to 75% of gene length [29] . For some embryonic and stem cell regulator genes, H3K27me3 is recognized by a plant version of PRC1 which subsequently monoubiquitinates H2AK120 and aids in gene silencing [30] . The H3K27me3 histone modification plays an important role in controlling the size of the floral meristem [31] and in leaf development [32] .During vernalization, the COLDAIR noncoding intronic RNA, which is encoded by the first intron of FLC, targets PRC2 to the FLC locus to promote trimethylation of H3K27 and silencing of the floral repressor [33] .
In this study, genome-wide locations of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 marks in mature and senescent Arabidopsis leaves were determined by ChIP-seq. Genomic regions that showed significant differences in these modifications were identified using ChIPnorm and correlated to changes in gene expression that accompany senescence. Gain or loss of the activating H3K4me3 mark correlated to up-or down-regulation during senescence and similar, but opposite, trends were observed for the silencing H3K27me3 mark. This loss in H3K4 trimethylation in older tissue was accompanied by an increase in expression of KDM5B-like genes encoding H3K4 demethylases. Surprisingly, two genes that were strongly up-regulated during senescence completely lacked the activating H3K4me3 mark.

Arabidopsis plants, grown on soil in light chambers with continuous illumination, were used in this study. Mature leaves were harvested 23 days after germination (23 d) when plants had incipient bolts and large expanded green rosette leaves. Senescent leaves were obtained from 52 day-old (52 d) plants with elongated bolts in which about half of the siliques were brown and dry ( Figure 1 ). The rosettes of the older plants had yellow-green leaves near the soil, but only fully-expanded green leaves were harvested. No cauline leaves or newly developed rosette leaves were harvested.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed using antibodies that recognize H3K4me3, H3K27me3, and H3-general along with input samples. Approximately 20 million unique single end reads were obtained for H3-general and input samples and the H3K4me3_23d sample while approximately 13 million unique single end reads were obtained for the two H3K27me3 samples (_23d and _52d) and the H3K4me3_52d sample. For all subsequent analyses, the appropriate input sample was chosen as the control since input reads did not significantly differ from H3-gen reads ( Figure S1 ). Data are displayed on a mirror UCSC genome browser (http://genomes.mcdb.ucla.edu/) under Senescence ChIP-seq and tracks are displayed in the following order, from top to bottom: H3K4me3_23d, H3K4me3_52d, K4_diff, H3K27me3_23d, H3K27me3_52d, and K27_diff. Gray bars under sequence read tracks show regions with significant signal (p,1e-6) above the appropriate input background (see Genome Browser and Figure 2 ).
Validity of data was evaluated by observing gene tracks with expected histone methylation patterns. ACTIN2 (At3g18780, Locus:2093954 ) is highly expressed at both 23 d and 52 d, and strong H3K4me3 marks and no H3K27me3 marks were observed in leaf samples of both ages at this locus ( Figure 2A ). The FLC floral repressor (At5g10140) is not expressed in the fri (Locus:2127013) mutant Col-0 ecotype [34, 35] , and is known to be silenced, in part, by H3K27me3 marks [12] . In both mature and senescent leaf tissue, the FLC gene was heavily marked by H3K27me3 ( Figure 2B ). The H3K4me3 mark was absent except for a small peak that spans the first exon and the beginning of the first intron, and a second small peak that covers the last exon, and may be related to expression of the COOLAIR long non-coding RNA [36] .
K4_diff and K27_diff tracks show regions with significant differences in levels of histone modification as determined by ChIPnorm [37] . Red bars indicate higher levels of histone methylation in the 23 d sample while green bars indicate higher levels of methylation in the 52 d sample in the Genome Browser. The ChIPnorm method was utilized to find differential regions between 23 d and 52 d H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 histone modification ChIP-seq data. ChIPnorm is a two-stage statistical approach to find differentially enriched regions of the genome given two ChIP-seq histone modification libraries. ChIPnorm removes the noise and the bias from two ChIP-seq libraries and normalizes the data to enable a direct comparison between the two libraries to identify differential regions. The first stage removes the regions which have stochastic background noise and local genomic bias, and in the second stage the two libraries are normalized using a quantile normalization procedure and then differential regions are identified. This approach outperformed other approaches in identifying differential regions without bias. Differential regions identified for the H3K4me3 mark were most abundant in the first kilobase (first five 200 bp bins) downstream of the TSS and were depleted in the same region upstream of the TSS ( Figure 3A) . Differential regions for the H3K27me3 mark were most abundant just downstream of the TSS, but did not show a marked depletion upstream of the TSS ( Figure 3B ). The location of the H3K4me3 differential regions generally matched the location of H3K4me3 modifications noted previously (20) while the location of H3K27me3 differential regions was further upstream than the previously noted peak of H3K27me3 marks (25% to 75% of gene length) (25) .
Senescence up-regulated genes (SURGs) and senescence downregulated genes (SDRGs) were identified from a published microarray analysis using naturally senescent leaf tissue that had lost approximately 25% of total chlorophyll, and was generally similar to the leaf tissue used in this study [4] with the exception that our plants were grown in continuous light at 24uC while the plants analyzed by microarray were grown under 16 hL:8 hD long-day conditions at 21uC during the day and 19uC at night. To confirm similarity between the two studies, 8 SURGs and 7 SDRGs were analyzed by real-time qPCR using RNA isolated from the same tissue used for ChIP-seq, and results are summarized in Table 1 . All 8 SURGs were found to be upregulated in our senescent leaves while 6 of 7 SDRGs were found to be down-regulated. These data indicate that our tissue is a fair representation of the published microarray results, and permit a larger scale analysis of gene expression and differential histone modifications ( Figure 4 ). A collection of 4090 genes, whose expression values were taken from a supplemental table published in [4] , were chosen for this expression analysis. These genes were divided into five groups with group A having the largest differential expression at 23 d (SDRGs), group C having approximately equal expression at 23 d and 52 d, and group E having the largest differential expression at 52 d (SURGs). Genes were categorized as having K4 at both developmental stages (K4-K4), at neither developmental stage (None-None) or only at 23 d (K4-None) or only at 52 d (None-K4). When histone methylation categories were graphed according to expression groups it could be seen that group A and B were enriched for K4-None while groups D and E were enriched for None-K4 ( Figure 4A ) demonstrating that H3K4me3 modifications play an activating role for SDRGs at 23 d and for SURGs at 52 d. The proportion of genes that were differentially marked was small, with most genes showing NoneNone (approximately 35% of 4090 genes) or K4-K4 (approximately 60% of 4090 genes). This is similar to observations made in mouse cells [37] . A similar analysis was done for the H3K27me3 modification, and group E genes were most highly enriched for K27-None demonstrating a repressive role for K27 at 23 d. Only a small number of genes showed the None-K27 pattern however these were concentrated in group E genes which do show reduced expression at 52 d ( Figure 4B ). For H3K27me3, the largest proportion of genes were unmodified (None-None, approximately 90% of 4090 genes), which is also similar to the analysis done for mouse [37] . SURGs (group E) that showed an increase in the H3K4me3 mark in older tissue were subject to GO analysis, and over-represented categories include response to stress and response to water deprivation. SURGs (group E) that showed a decrease in the H3K27me3 mark were over-represented in response to abiotic stress as well as response to water deprivation GO categories. Leaves undergoing senescence do experience oxidative stress and water loss. A small number of genes were shared among the response to water deprivation classification indicating that H3K4me3 increase was coupled to a decrease in H3K27me3 for a subset of genes. SDRGs (group A) that showed a decrease in the H3K4me3 mark were enriched for the response to auxin stimulus category, including four SAUR-like genes (At5g18030, At4g34760, At1g29460, At5g18060) and the AUX1 auxin influx transporter (At2g38120). These genes are recognized to be involved in rapid auxin response and cell elongation, and down-regulation during senescence is expected and appears to involve a decrease in the H3K4me3 mark.
ChIP-seq reads are shown for two SURGs in Figure 5 and two SDRGs in Figure 6 . At3g44300 is up-regulated 309-fold and At1g13340 is up-regulated 16-fold in older leaves ( Table 1) . The K4_diff track is visible and colored green for both genes since there is an increased level of the H3K4me3 mark in the 52 d sample. Lhcb2.3 is down-regulated 25-fold and At2g10940 is downregulated 14,000-fold in older leaves (Table 1) , and both have K4_diff tracks colored red since there is increased level of the H3K4me3 mark in the 23 d sample. Interestingly, the strongly down-regulated At2g10940 also shows a significant increase in the H3K27me3 mark in the 52 d tissue shown by the green bars in the K27_diff track.
A small number of genes showed bivalent H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 modifications at 23 d which became monovalent H3K4me3 or H3K27me3 modifications at 52 d. Genes retaining the activating H3K4me3 marks were in groups C, D and E, while genes retaining the H3K27me3 marks were only in groups A and B ( Figure 7) . These results provide additional support for an activating role for H3K4me3 and a silencing role for H3K27me3 as leaves age.
H3K4me3 demethylation is catalyzed by KDM5B/JARID1B family members [38] , and there are 8 potential KDM5B-like genes in Arabidopsis [39, 40] . Expression of these eight genes was measured in 52 d and 23 d leaf tissue using real-time qPCR with ACT2 as the reference. One of the genes, At2g34880, had undetectable mRNA levels in both tissues. Six of the remaining 7 genes showed some degree of up-regulation in the senescent leaf tissue with At5g46910, At1g08620, At1g63490, At4g20400, At2g38950 and, At1g30810 all displaying a greater than 2-fold induction ( Figure 8) . One of these genes, At4g20400 has been shown to affect the timing of flowering [41, 42, 43] , but the five other KDM5B-like genes do not yet have ascribed functions (www.arabidopsis.org).
One other study quantified H3K4me3 marks in senescent Arabidopsis leaf tissue at the WRKY53 locus (At4g23810, Locus:2128514), and found a small increase in this modification in senescent leaves [18] . Our genome-wide quantitative analysis also showed enriched H3K4me3 marks on the WRKY53 gene, however no quantitative difference in these marks was observed between the 23 d and 52 d samples ( Figure S2 ). No significant enrichment of H3K27me3 marks was observed for the WRKY53 gene. In our tissue, WRKY53 mRNA was only up-regulated by 1.7-fold at 52 d compared to 23 d. The largest increase in WRKY53 expression likely occurred prior to tissue harvest [44] , and this may explain the discrepancy with the previous study.
Surprisingly, two genes that are strongly up-regulated during senescence did not show expected H3K4me3 histone modification patterns. SAG12 (At5g45890), which encodes a cysteine protease and is considered a molecular marker for senescence, was up-regulated 90,000-fold in the 52 d tissue (Table 1) , but this gene was devoid of H3K4me3 marks at both 23 d and 52 d. H3-general sequence reads showed that histones were present in the SAG12 promoter region (data not shown). In addition, H3K27me3 modifications were found in this region, but trimethylation levels were not significantly different between the two samples as shown by a lack of green or red bars in the K27_diff tracks. The adjacent gene, At5g45900, did contain H3K4me3 marks near its TSS indicating there is no general loss of this modification in this region of the genome, rather SAG12 specifically lacks H3K4me3 marks ( Figure 9A ). It is unlikely that increased mRNA stability is the cause of increased mRNA levels because the SAG12 promoter has been shown to activate reporter genes during senescence [45] . A second SURG, At1g73220, encodes a carbohydrate transporter, and mRNA levels were increased 113-fold at 52 d (Table 1 ). This gene also completely lacks the H3K4me3 mark despite high mRNA levels at 52 d ( Figure 9B ). At1g73220 does have similar levels of H3K27me3 marks in both mature and senescent leaves indicating that histones are present in this region. These two important exceptions show that the H3K4me3 mark is not required for high levels of gene expression in senescent leaf tissue.
A biological replicate was performed utilizing plants grown under similar conditions and harvested at 23 d and 53 d. Nuclei were isolated and ChIP was performed using antibodies from the same company, but different lot numbers. Immunoprecipitated DNA was analyzed by real-time qPCR, and results were similar to ChIP-seq findings (Figure 10 ). H3K4me3 modifications were associated with ACT2, but absent in FLC. At1g44300 (SURG, Figure 5A ) showed an increase in the H3K4me3 mark in older leaves while At2g10940 (SDRG, Figure 6B ) showed a decrease in the H3K4me3 mark in older leaves. The H3K4me3 modification was absent in SAG12 (SURG, Figure 10 ). The H3K27me3 antibody displayed reduced avidity, and only small amounts of the FLC genomic regions were immunoprecipitated. Increased H3K27me3 marks were observed at the At2g10940 gene at 52 d ( Figure 6B ), and this similar pattern was observed for the biological replicate ( Figure 10 ). 
We report genome-wide patterns of histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 4 and lysine 27 in mature (23 d) and senescent (52 d) Arabidopsis leaves. Senescence is the orderly, final process of leaf development, and this study aimed to determine if there were any epigenetic changes that marked the chromatin of the senescent leaf and if these correlated to changes in gene expression. The H3K4me3 mark is predominantly associated with active genes while the H3K27me3 mark is predominantly associated with silenced, tissue-specific genes. Genome-wide analyses of both modifications have been reported for 10-14 day old seedlings grown in vitro on artificial medium that contained sucrose [16, 23, 29] , while the data presented in this work catalogue these histone methylations in chromatin from leaves harvested from plants grown on soil at two stages of development: mature, fullyexpanded leaves from plants with incipient bolts (23 d) and leaves harvested from plants undergoing natural senescence (52 d). Arabidopsis is a monocarpic plant in which whole-plant senescence follows seed production. Senescent leaves were harvested when approximately half of the siliques were brown, and therefore undergoing the process of whole-plant natural senescence. At this time, the oldest leaves of the rosette were yellow or brown, while the younger, but fully-expanded, leaves of the rosette were still green. These green fully-expanded leaves were harvested for the senescent sample and represent older leaves that will soon become yellow and go through cell death. Similar expression patterns for 15 of 16 genes shown to be upor down-regulated during senescence in previous studies [1, 4] , demonstrated that the 23 d leaf tissue was mature, while the 52 d sample was undergoing natural senescence and allowed a larger scale expression analysis from a separate study to be correlated with these ChIP-seq results.
Correlation of changes in histone modifications to gene expression revealed that SURGs displayed increased H3K4me3 in the senescent tissue while SDRGs showed increased H3K4me3 modifications in the younger tissue. These changes in modification status were only observed in 9% of SURGs from group E and 6% of SDRGs from group A, which although a small fraction, is over 60 genes, and likely more since the analysis was performed with only 4090 genes. Only slight changes in the expression of ten ATX and ATXR genes which encode H3K4 methyltransferases [28] , were observed in older leaves [1] indicating that H3K4 trimethylation activity is not transcriptionally regulated. Group A SDRGs that showed a decreased H3K4me3 methylation were enriched in the response to auxin category. Enrichment of auxinresponse genes was also noted for the H3K27me3 mark in another study [32] indicating that histone modification may play an important role in the regulation of auxin responses.
For the 4090 genes analyzed by ChIPnorm, approximately 35% of the genes were classified as None-None with respect to H3K4me3 modifications at 23 d and 52 d, and this value was closer to 50% for group E SURGs. This large proportion of SURGs was expressed without significant levels of the activating H3K4me3 mark. Two striking examples are SAG12 and At1g73220, which were both highly expressed during senescence, yet completely lacked H3K4me3 marks. It is possible that other epigenetic marks, such as histone acetylation or cytosine methylation, may be changing as a leaf enters senescence, and these modifications will be evaluated at these two loci in future work. In addition, modifications at enhancers may affect gene expression, and this, too, can be evaluated [46] . H3K4me3-independent gene expression has not been widely reported, however one study demonstrated that the human Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE, NM_000383) protein can activate expression of target genes that lack H3K4me3 marks [47] , however induced expression levels were low, which differs from the highly expressed SAG12 mRNA. Thus, the observation of H3K4me3-independent high expression appears to be novel. The increased expression of SAG12 and At1g73220 could be mediated by the respective promoters in a histone-modification-independent manner. The presence of H3K27me3 marks was delayed compared to changes in gene expression for a dexamethasone-responsive FLC transgene [34] . In this study, addition of DEX increased DEX:: FLC gene expression within 6 h, yet a decrease in H3K27me3 was not observed for 12-24 h. These results show that changes in gene expression can precede changes in histone methylation, however H3K4me3 modifications were not measured in this study.
Six percent of SDRGs displayed a loss of the H3K4me3 mark. H3K4me3 demethylation is catalyzed by KDM5B JmJC-domain containing proteins [38] , and 8 putative KDM5B-like genes have been identified in Arabidopsis. One of these genes, At4g20400, displays H3K4me3 demethylase activity when recombinant protein is purified from E. coli [41, 43] . Other KDM5B-like genes play roles in flowering [42] , brassinosteroid signaling [48] and gametophyte development [49] . Seven of the 8 KDM5B-like genes were found to be up-regulated in the 52 d leaf tissue, and six of the genes were up-regulated over 2-fold. Expression of SDRGs is currently being evaluated in T-DNA insertion lines that disrupt senescence up-regulated KDM5B-like genes that do not affect the timing of flowering, and higher order mutants will be constructed based on results from single mutant studies.
Differences in trimethylation of H3K27 were also evaluated by ChIPnorm and correlated to gene expression. A decrease in H3K27me3 marks at 52 d was observed for SURGs, but an increase in H3K27me3 at 52 d was only rarely observed for SDRGs. H3K27me3 marks can be removed by the REF6 demethylase [50] , which is expressed at both 23 and 52 d (data not shown). The H3K27me3 methylation status was NoneNone for approximately 90% of the genes in groups A through E indicating this histone methylation is one of many mechanisms that are utilized for the transition into leaf senescence. This study evaluated H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 histone marks in mature and senescent Arabidopsis leaf tissue using ChIP-seq and ChIPnorm and genome-wide results are displayed on a publicly available Genome Browser web site. Differentially modified regions were identified, and an activating role for H3K4me3 as well as a repressive role for H3K27me3, were revealed. Activating H3K4me3 marks were found to decrease in genes down-regulated during senescence and numerous KDM5B-like genes, encoding H3K4me3 demethylases, were found to have increased expression in senescent leaves. Surprisingly, two genes with high levels of expression in senescent leaf tissue lacked activating H3K4me3 marks. Although other histone modifications and DNA methylation need to be tested, these results show that high expression levels can be uncoupled from the H3K4me3 mark in senescent leaf tissue.

Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Col-0 were grown on Sunshine Mix #1 soil under constant illumination (55 mmoles photons ) at 24uC in a Percival E36HO light chamber, and fertilized weekly, for the number of days indicated.
Nuclei were isolated from leaf tissue using a modified version of a published protocol [51] . Well-watered plants were placed in the dark overnight to deplete starch reserves. Four g of leaf tissue was loosely packed into a 50 ml conical tube and 37 ml of crosslinking buffer (0.4 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0, 1% formaldehyde, 1 mM PMSF) was added to the tube which was covered with parafilm, pricked with a needle and placed in a vacuum chamber evacuated with the house vacuum line for 10 min. 2.5 ml of 2 M glycine was then added to the tube, and vacuum infiltration continued for 5 min. Leaves were rinsed 36 in cold, deionized water, and blotted dry on Kimwipes. Dried tissue was ground in liquid nitrogen for 2.5 min, and transferred to a 50 ml tube containing 25 ml of cold nuclei isolation buffer (0.25 M sucrose, 15 mM PIPES, pH 6.8, 5 mM MgCl 2 , 60 mM KCl, 15 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0.9% Triton X-100, 2 mg/ml pepstatin A, 2 mg/ml aprotinin) and vortexed for 10 sec every min for 15 min, returning sample to ice between vortex steps. The slurry was then filtered through four layers of autoclaved cheesecloth and the filtrate was centrifuged at 11,000 g for 20 min at 4uC. The supernatant was immediately poured off and the green/white pellet was gently resuspended in 2 ml cold nuclei lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0, 1% SDS, 0.1% Na deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mg/ml pepstatin A, 1 mg/ml aprotinin). Four ml of ChIP dilution buffer was added to the sample (150 mM NaCl, 16.7 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 3.3 mM EDTA, pH 8.0, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Na deoxycholate, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mg/ml pepstatin A, 1 mg/ml aprotinin), and 300 ml aliquots were flash frozen in liquid N 2 , and stored at 280uC.
Fifty ml of Dynabeads TM Protein G (Invitrogen, Inc) were washed 36 with 500 ml ChIP dilution buffer, and resuspended to 95 ml with ChIP dilution buffer plus 5 ml of antibody [H3K4me3 (Millipore 17-678), H3K27me3 (Millipore 07-449) H3-general (Millipore 17-10046)], and rotated at 4uC for 2 h. After a quick spin, Dyanbeads coupled to antibodies were washed once with 500 ml ChIP dilution buffer and then twice with 500 ml ChIP dilution buffer with 5 mg/ml BSA. After washes, Dynabeads coupled to antibodies were resuspended in 500 ml ChIP dilution buffer with 5 mg/ml BSA and rotated at 4uC for 2 h to saturate non-specific binding sites.
Nuclei were thawed on ice and then transferred to 1.5 ml polymethyl pentene tubes (Diagenode, Inc) and sonicated in a Diagenode BioRupter at 4uC for 30 cycles of 30 sec sonication at the highest setting and 30 sec off. Sonicated nuclei were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4uC for 10 min, and supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube containing 700 ml ChIP dilution buffer on ice. The 1 ml of sonicated nuclei were added to 50 ml of Dynabeads TM protein G that had been washed 36 with 500 ml ChIP dilution buffer, and rotated for 2 h at 4uC in order to preclear the nuclei for non-specific binding activity. Dynabeads coupled to antibody were pulled back, the supernatant was removed, and tubes with beads were placed on ice. Dynabeads from pre-cleared nuclei were pulled back, the precleared nuclei were transferred to the tubes with Dyanbeads coupled to antibody on ice (or an empty tube for the input sample), and tubes were rotated overnight at 4uC.
Beads were washed 36(500 ml) with three sequential ChIP Wash Buffers (A, B, C). Each wash step was done for 4 min with rotation at RT. ChIP Wash Buffer A: 20 mM Tris, pH 8.1, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100; ChIP Wash Buffer B: 20 mM Tris, pH 8.1, 500 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1%Triton X-100; and ChIP Wash Buffer C: 10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 250 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Na-deoxycholate, 1% NP-40. Dynabeads were then washed twice in 1 ml 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA. Dynabeads were then eluted twice each with 100 ml of 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 18.75 mM EDTA, 1% SDS at 65uC for 15 min with vortexing every 2 min. Dynabeads were pelleted in a microcentrifuge and the eluants were combined. 200 mL of input sample was removed after overnight incubation without washes. 200 ml of 0.4 M NaCl diluted in TE was added along with 2 ml RNAse A (10 mg/ml), followed by 10 min at 37uC. Crosslinks were then reversed at 65uC for 5 h. Three ml of proteinase K (20 mg/ml) was added and incubated at 55uC for 1 h. DNA was then precipitated overnight using 8 mg glycogen carrier and 850 ml 100% ethanol, washed with 80% ethanol, and the dry pellet was resuspended in 30 ml H 2 O. DNA (2 ml) was quantified using the Quant-IT High Sensitivity Assay (Invitrogen, Inc).
End repair was performed on 5 ng of ChIP DNA using the End-IT kit from Epicentre Technologies with reactions running for 1 h at RT. DNA was then purified on a Mini-elute spin column (Qiagen) and eluted with 32 ml EB. Adenine overhang reactions were set up with 15 units of Klenow fragment (New England Biolabs) and 0.2 mM dATP and run for 30 min at 37uC. DNA was then purified on a mini-elute spin column and eluted with 18.8 ml of EB. Adaptors were obtained from the USC Epigenome center, and were diluted (1:40) and added to 26Rapid Buffer (Enzymatics) and this mixture was added to purified dAtailed DNA. 3,000 units of Enzymatics T4 DNA Ligase was then added, and ligation was done for 15 min at RT, and promptly These genes were classified into those that lost both modifications at 52 d (K4+K27-None, dark blue), those that retained the H3K27me3 mark at 52 d (K4+K27 -K27, light blue), those that retained the H3K4me3 mark at 23 d (K4+K27-K4, yellow) and those that retained the bivalent marks (K4+K27-K4+K27, brick red). Genes thus classified were then placed into the five groups shown in Figure 4 . Genes that retained the H3K27me3 mark were restricted to groups A and B while genes that retained the H3K4me3 mark were restricted to groups C-E. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0033151.g007 Figure 8 . Expression of Arabidopsis KDM5B-like genes in senescent leaf tissue. KDM5B genes encode H3K4me3 demethylases, and eight KDM5B-like genes were identified in Arabidopsis. The same tissue used in the ChIP-seq analysis was analyzed for expression of the KDM5B-like genes using real-time qPCR. ACT2 was the reference gene and relative expression at 52 d compared to 23 d is shown. Two KDM5B-like genes affect flowering time [41, 42, 43] , and their published names as well as known target gene are shown. At2g34880 mRNA was undetectable in both RNA samples, and is not shown. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0033151.g008 stopped by addition of 250 ml PB buffer (Qiagen) and purification on a mini-elute spin column. DNA was eluted twice, once with 20 ml of EB and then with 19.2 ml EB, and eluants were combined. PCR reactions were set up with 2 units of Platinum Pfx DNA Polymerase (Invitrogen) with 0.4 mM dNTPs, 2 mM MgSO 4 and 0.5 mM primers. Amplification conditions were 94uC for 2 min, 98uC for 30 sec followed by 18 cycles of 98uC for 10 sec, 65uC for 30 sec and 72uC for 30 sec followed by 72uC for 4 min. After PCR was complete, the sample was run on a 1.5% agarose TAE gel using loading buffer with no dye. Multiple samples were run on separate gels to prevent cross-contamination. DNA that was clearly separated from the adaptor dimer band was cut from the gel and purified using spin columns (Qiagen). Gel pieces were melted in QC buffer at 37uC to prevent loss of AT-rich fragments. DNA was eluted in 40 ml of EB and quantified as before. DNA was submitted to the USC Epigenome Center for clustering and singleend sequencing analysis on an Illumina HiSeq system. Adaptors and primers are standard Illumina sequences and are listed at http://epigenome.usc.edu/docs/making_libraries/DNA_Library_ Protocol_100428.pdf.
Total RNA was isolated with TRIzol TM reagent (Invitrogen, Inc), and 1 mg of total RNA was used for cDNA synthesis using random hexamer primers and M-MLV reverse transcriptase. The qPCR Design Tool available at Eurofins mwg/Operon was used for qPCR primer design, primers were tested for linearity with different amounts of cDNA, and all r-values for linearity were above 0.9 0.03 ng of ChIP DNA was used as a template for realtime qPCR amplification. Background was defined as the level of H3K4me3 at FLC and the level of H3K27me3 at ACT2. ABSOLUTE TM QPCR SYBR Green PCR mix (Thermo Scientific) was used in 12 mL reactions amplified in a Stratagene 
TM Real-Time PCR system with a 62uC annealing temperature. Real-time primers used in this study are listed in Table S1 along with TAIR Accession numbers.
Reads were mapped to the TAIR7 genome using MAQ 0.7.1, and only reads that align to a unique position were retained for further analysis. Duplicate reads that map to the same location on the genome were counted once to reduce clonal amplification effects. The genome was tiled with 100 base windows, and each read was extended by 150 bases which adds one count to each window containing a portion of the read. The counts were estimated for the immunoprecipitate sample as well as the input sample, and the total counts of the input sample were normalized to equal those of the immunoprecipitate. The input sample was used to estimate the expected counts in a window, and if these were zero, they were set to the average value for all windows. Finally, the Poisson distribution was used to estimate the probability of observing the immunoprecipitate counts within a window given the expected counts in the input sample window. We considered all windows with p values less than 1e-6 to have significant peaks. By comparing the number of peaks in the comparison of two inputs, to those found by comparing an immunoprecipitated sample to input, we estimate that this threshold corresponds to a 2% false discovery rate.
For ChIPnorm, the fold change threshold t was set at 2.0, and the ChIP-seq data were binned at 200 bp. Figure 10 . Biological replicate to confirm ChIP-seq data. Plants were grown under similar growth chamber conditions for 23 d and 53 d and subject to ChIP followed by real-time qPCR with primers that were designed to amplify the peaks of histone modification observed with ChIP-seq. The ACT2 gene showed high enrichment for the H3K4me3 mark in both samples while the FLC gene showed some enrichment for the H3K27me3 mark in both samples. Differential H3K4me3 modifications were observed for the SURG At1g44300 and the SDRG At2g10940. In addition, the gain in H3K27me3 marks at 52 d was observed for At2g10940. The SAG12 gene lacked H3K4me3 marks. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0033151.g010

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) mediate changes in nucleosome conformation and are important in the regulation of gene expression (1) . HDACs are involved in cell-cycle progression and differentiation, and their deregulation is associated with several cancers (2) . HDAC inhibitors, such as trichostatin A and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, have emerged recently as promising chemotherapeutic agents (1, 3) because they have antitumor effects. They can inhibit cell growth, induce terminal differentiation, and prevent the formation of tumors in mice models (1, 4, 5) . Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, in particular, has been shown to induce growth arrest, differentiation, and/or apoptosis in a variety of cell types (4 -7) and inhibit tumor growth in vivo (6, 8 -10) . Furthermore, because of its low toxicity, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid is currently in clinical trials for the treatment of solid and hematologic tumors (5, 11, 12) .
Although suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid has been shown to cause cells to differentiate and undergo apoptosis, the mechanisms underlying these events are largely unknown. One previous study proposed that changes at the level of chromatin structure, induced by a HDAC inhibitor such as sodium butyrate (NaBT), leads to the expression of an unknown protein that facilitates the pathway by which mitochondria activate caspase-3 and trigger apoptotic death of cancer cells (13) . Another study has showed that butyrate induces 15-lipoxygenase-1 (14) . On the basis of these two studies, we hypothesized that 15-lipoxygenase-1 could be one such protein that activates the apoptotic pathway or commits the cells to apoptosis in the case of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid. To assess whether suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced growth inhibition, differentiation, and/or apoptosis involve 15-lipoxygenase-1, we examined whether suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid can induce 15-lipoxygenase-1 and whether suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced apoptosis is dependent on 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression and function.
Cell Culture. The human colorectal cell lines Caco-2, HCT-116, and SW-480 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and were grown at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO 2 /95% air atmosphere. The Caco-2 cells were grown in Eagle's minimal essential medium (1ϫ; Life Technologies, Inc., Carlsbad, CA) with L-glutamine supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum, 1 mmol/L sodium pyruvate (Life Technologies, Inc., and 1 mg/100 mL gentamicin (Life Technologies, Inc.). The HCT-116 and SW-480 cells were grown in RPMI media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. Trypsin (Life Technologies, Inc.) was used to subculture cells.
Treatment with HDAC Inhibitors. NaBT (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was dissolved in PBS, and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid was dissolved in DMSO. Cells were treated from 0 to 4 days and at the doses indicated. Treatment groups were compared with vehicle controls. Caffeic acid, a 15-lipoxygenase-1 inhibitor, was used at a concentration of 2.2 mol/L. The specificity of this concentration has been previously established for inhibiting 15-lipoxygenase-1 in colorectal cancer cells (15) . Nordihydroguaiaretic acid, a general lipoxygenase inhibitor, was used at a concentration of 10 mol/L. Cells were harvested at the various time points indicated.
Western Blot Analysis of 15-Lipoxygenase-1 Protein. In general, SDS-PAGE and Western blotting techniques were carried out as described previously (16) . Briefly, treated and control cells groups were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed in protein lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Cells were sonicated three times for 5 seconds each at 50% power for a total protein preparation. Protein content was quantified by the Bradford method as described previously (16) . Aliquots of the protein preparation were heated to 70°C in protein sample buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and separated by a 4 to 12% gradient gel (Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane (Invitrogen). Blots were blocked with 10% nonfat dry milk in 20 mmol/L Tris-buffered saline (pH 7.4) containing 0.05% Tween 20 (TBS-T) and washed. The blots were then incubated in 1% milk in TBS-T with an appropriate primary antibody. Rabbit polyclonal antiserum to recombinant human 15-lipoxygenase-1 was a gift from Mary Mulkins and Elloit Sigal (Roche Bioscience, Palo Alto, CA) and was also generated by Lampire Biological Laboratories (Pipersville, PA). The 15-lipoxygenase-1 primary antibody was used at a dilution of 1:2000. Normal human tracheobronchial epithelial cells, as previously described (16) , were used as a positive control for the expression of 15-lipoxygenase-1. Actin antibody (Sigma) was used at a dilution of 1:2000. Actin was analyzed as a control for protein loading. After washing, blots were incubated with an appropriate horseradish peroxidaselinked secondary antibody (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ). After reaction with chemiluminescence reagents (Amersham enhanced chemiluminescence system), bands were detected by exposure to film (Amersham).
After treatment with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The protein concentration was determined by Bradford's method. 13-S-Hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid levels were determined with an ELISA kit (Assay Design, Ann Arbor, MI) according to the manufacturer's specifications. 13-S-Hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid concentrations were expressed as nanograms per microgram of crude protein.
Cellular Proliferation. Cells were grown in 100-mm plates and treated with compounds of interest or vehicle at indicated concentrations and for 0 to 96 hours. Cells were harvested and counted at the indicated time points. Growth curves were plotted with the number of attached cells at the time of harvesting. Cellular Differentiation. Cell differentiation was assessed by measuring the enzymatic activity of alkaline phosphates. Cell lysates were prepared after 0, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours of incubation with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The protein concentration was measured by Bradford's method. Alkaline phosphatase activity, a marker for differentiation, was used to assess differentiation. An alkaline phosphatase kit (Pointe Scientific, Inc., Lincoln Park, MI) was used according to the manufacturer's specifications.
DNA Fragmentation Assay. After treatment of interest, floating and attached cells were harvested at the indicated time points. Washed cell pellets were resuspended in cell lysis buffer [10 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH7.4), 10 mmol/L EDTA (pH 8.0), 0.5% TritonX-100] and incubated for 10 minutes at 4°C. Cell lysates were centrifuged and then Rnase A (0.5 mg/mL) and proteinase K (0.5 mg/mL) were added and incubated for 2 hours at 37°C. DNA was extracted from an equal number of cells and then was precipitated by etomidate and run on a 2% agarose gel as described previously (15) . Agarose gels were stained with etomidate and DNA visualized by an UV transilluminater.
Caspase 3 Assay. After treatment of interest, floating and attached cells were harvested at the indicated time points. Cells were counted and an equal number of cells were used for each sample with a Caspase 3 kit (BD Biosciences Clontech, Palo Alto, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
Suberoylanilide Hydroxamic Acid Effects on 15-Lipoxygenase-1 Expression in Colon Cancer Cells. Three different colorectal cancer cell lines, Caco-2, SW-480, and HCT-116, were found to express 15-lipoxygenase-1 after treatment with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (data not shown). We have selected the Caco-2 cell line for all subsequent experiments to study the effect of 15-lipoxygenase-1 on apoptosis because of its ability to undergo terminal differentiation. The induction of 15-lipoxygenase-1 by suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid was both dose and time dependent (Fig. 1) . Caco-2 cells were treated with varying concentration of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid ranging from 0.1 to 10 mol/L for 24 hours. An increase in 15-lipoxygenase-1 was observed at concentrations as low as 1 mol/L but was strongly expressed at 2.5 mol/L and higher. The cells were also treated with 2.5 mol/L suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid for 0 to 96 hours, and 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression was determined (Fig. 1B) . 15-Lipoxygenase-1 was observed as early as 12 hours, and expression increased at 24 hours and remained at later time points.
Suberoylanilide Hydroxamic Acid Effects on 13-S-Hydroxyoctadecadienoic Acid Formation. 13-S-Hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid is the primary metabolite of 15-lipoxygenase-1. To determine whether the suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced expression of 15-lipoxygenase-1 also increased 13-S-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid levels, 13-S-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid was measured in treated and untreated cells. Treatment of Caco-2 cells with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid for 24 hours increased endogenous 13-S-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid levels by 2-fold compared with untreated control cells (Fig. 2) . Furthermore, the 13-S-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid levels were reduced upon addition of 15-lipoxygenase-1 inhibitors caffeic acid (2.2 mol/L; ref. 15) or the more general lipoxygenase inhibitor nordihydroguaiaretic acid (10 mol/L).
Effect of 15-Lipoxygenase-1 Inhibition on Cell Growth. Caco-2 cells were treated with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid or suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid plus caffeic acid for 0 -96 h and cell growth examined. At 72 and 96 h, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid reduced the cell count by 45% and 54% respectively compared with untreated control cells (Fig. 3) . Inhibiting 15-lipoxygenase-1 activity with caffeic acid (2.2 mol/L) attenuated the suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced cell count reduction. Caffeic acid alone did not affect cell growth (data not shown). 
To determine whether 15-lipoxygenase-1 is involved in suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced differentiation, alkaline phosphatase activity, a marker for differentiation, was measured in Caco-2 cells treated with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid or suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid plus caffeic acid for 0 to 96 hours. Treatment of the cells with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid resulted in an increase in alkaline phosphatase activity over time compared with untreated control cells (Fig. 4A) . Inhibition of 15-lipoxygenase-1 activity with caffeic acid attenuated this effect.
To determine whether 15-lipoxygenase-1 also plays a role in suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced apoptosis, DNA fragmentation assays were used to assess apoptosis in cells treated with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid or suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid plus caffeic acid. At 72 hours, DNA laddering was observed for cells treated with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (Fig. 4B) . Inhibition of 15-lipoxygenase-1 with caffeic acid blocked the suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced DNA laddering. No laddering was observed for untreated control cells or for cells treated with caffeic acid alone. Similar results were observed at 96 hours of treatment (data not shown). Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced apoptosis and its inhibition by caffeic acid were also confirmed by measuring caspase 3 activity. At 72 hours, caspase 3 activity of Caco-2 cells treated with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid increased over 3.7-fold compared with untreated control cells (Fig. 4C) . Inhibition of 15-lipoxygenase-1 activity with caffeic acid attenuated the caspase 3 activity. Similar results were observed at 96 hours of treatment (data not shown).
The present study is the first to establish that HDAC inhibitorinduced apoptosis and 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression are linked mechanistically. We found that the HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid induced 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression in a dose-and time-dependent manner and induced growth arrest and apoptosis. This is the first study to show a relationship between suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid and 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression. Inhibition of 15-lipoxygenase-1 with 2.2 mol/L caffeic acid, a concentration shown to be specific for 15-lipoxygenase-1 inhibition, resulted in the attenuation of the suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced effects of growth inhibition, apoptosis, and, possibly, differentiation. The induction of 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression, which is suppressed in colon tumor cells, likely will play an important role in the potential clinical effects of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid in colorectal cancer prevention and therapy.
Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid is one of a number of chemically diverse agents, including the short chain fatty acid NaBT, that can inhibit HDAC activity. NaBT is an extensively studied low-potency HDAC inhibitor that has antitumor activity and can induce differentiation and apoptosis in various cancer cell lines. In human colorectal carcinoma Caco-2 cells, Kamitani et al. (14) found that NaBT induces the expression of 15-lipoxygenase-1 and differentiation and apoptosis. Although this study provided the first evidence that a HDAC inhibitor can upregulate 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression in human colorectal carcinoma cells, it did not establish a mechanistic link between 15-lipoxygenase-1 and HDAC inhibitor-induced differentiation and apoptosis. The authors did speculate that 15-lipoxygenase-1 induction may have been associated with differentiation and apoptosis after treatment with 5 mmol/L NaBT. Kamitani et al. (14) used the nonspecific lipoxygenase inhibitor nordihydroguaiaretic acid to assess the relationship of 15-lipoxygenase-1 with differentiation and apoptosis. Furthermore, nordihydroguaiaretic acid also can influence the redox state of cells. Because nordihydroguaiaretic acid can influence other lipoxygenases (besides 15-lipoxygenase-1) and the redox state, the authors concluded that the importance of 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression in the mechanism of NaBT-induced differentiation and apoptosis was not clear. Building on these findings, our presently reported results based on the specific inhibition of 15-lipoxygenase-1 show for the first time that HDAC inhibitor-induced apoptosis is mechanistically linked to 15-lipoxygenase-1. We also used the more clinically relevant HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid at clinically achievable concentrations.
A broad spectrum of transformed cells are sensitive to suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced growth inhibition in in vitro and in vivo studies (1) . Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid is in phase I and II clinical trials for the treatment of various cancers and has shown anticancer activity at doses that are well tolerated by patients (11, 12) . These preclinical results and the clinical trials show that suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid targets transformed cells in preference to normal cells (9) .
The inhibition of HDAC by suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid occurs through a direct interaction with the catalytic site of the enzyme as shown by X-ray crystallography studies (17) . Inhibition of HDAC activity results in the accumulation of acetylated histones H2a, H2b, H3, and H4. The result of HDAC inhibition is believed not to have a generalized effect on the genome but rather only effects the transcription of a small subset of the genome (18) . Evidence provided by DNA microarrays with malignant cell lines cultured with a HDAC inhibitor shows that there are a small (1 to 2%) number of genes of which the products are altered (7, 18, 19) . From this study and others (14) , it appears that 15-lipoxygenase-1 is among the few genes altered by HDACs in colorectal carcinoma cells.
We have investigated the effect of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid on human colorectal cancer cell lines. We have shown that suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid can induce 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression in colorectal cancer cells and that inhibition of 15-lipoxygenase-1 can attenuate the effects of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid in these cells. These findings indicate an important role for 15-lipoxygenase-1 in mediating suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced and, more generally, HDAC inhibitor-induced growth inhibition, differentiation, and apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells. Furthermore, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid can induce 15-lipoxygenase-1 at concentrations in the low micromolar range in comparison to NaBT, which has been reported to induce 15-lipoxygenase-1 with 5 mmol/L concentration range. Although appearing to have antitumor activity, NaBT has been hampered in its clinical development by a short half-life (5 minutes) and the inability to achieve a therapeutic level in plasma. The fact that suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid can induce 15-lipoxygenase-1 in the 1 to 2 mol/L concentration range is of clinical relevance and may also explain in part the success of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid as a therapeutic agent in treatment of colon cancer.
The present study shows that the induction of 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression is involved mechanistically in suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid-induced growth arrest and apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells. Establishing this mechanistic link emphasizes the importance of future investigations of the mechanisms by which HDAC inhibitors such as suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid up-regulate 15-lipoxygenase-1. These mechanisms remain unknown and could occur at the transcriptional and/or posttranslational levels because 15-lipoxygenase-1 regulation occurs at both levels (20, 21) . Additional mechanistic studies of 15-lipoxygenase-1 regulation in colorectal cancer cells potentially will advance the development of effective agents for colorectal cancer prevention and therapy.
A 24-year-old male nonalcoholic patient with acute pancreatitis presented to the hospital with severe abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. At the time of presentation, his serum amylase and lipase levels were elevated with normal liver and renal function. Duplex Doppler (►Fig. 1a) showed the presence of a large pseudoaneurysm with to and fro color flow and characteristic yin-yang pattern in the pancreatic head region. Multiphase contrastenhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen (►Fig. 1b-d) demonstrated a pseudoaneurysm in the pancreatic head region, measuring 63 Â 46 Â 40 mm with a thin rim of peripheral thrombus. In addition, features of pancreatitis were noted as well as a large pseudocyst in the pancreatic tail causing displacement of the stomach anteriorly.
As open surgery was not the best option in acute pancreatitis, transarterial embolization was considered. Digital subtraction angiography (►Fig. 2) of the common hepatic artery showed the presence of a large pseudoaneurysm in the pancreatic head region, at the origin of the gastroduodenal artery. Despite superselective angiography of the gastroduodenal artery and proper hepatic artery in different projection, the neck of the pseudoaneurysm could not be identified. Since we were not able to identify the neck and the feeding artery to the pseudoaneurysm, transarterial embolization was not considered and percutaneous embolization with thrombin injection was chosen. A spinal needle (22 G) was inserted into the aneurysmal sac through the anterior abdominal wall under ultrasound (US) guidance (►Fig. 3a) and 1,000 IU of reconstituted human thrombin (ReliStat, Reliance Life Science) was injected. US demonstrated thrombus formation within the aneurysmal sac and at the end of injection, there was complete obliteration of the sac with no color flow seen. A repeat angiogram (►Fig. 3b) through the common hepatic artery showed no filling of the aneurysm. No immediate complications were observed. Follow-up abdominal CT (►Fig. 4b, c) at 1 week and Doppler US (►Fig. 4a) examination at 4 weeks confirmed complete thrombosis of the pseudoaneurysm with preserved flow through celiac arterial branches.
Pancreatic pseudoaneurysm is a rare but life-threatening complication secondary to pancreatitis, surgery, trauma, or infection. Early treatment is advocated due to high risk of rupture and bleeding. Surgical treatment has traditionally been the first line but is associated with high morbidity. Transarterial embolization or exclusion is the treatment of choice; however, in cases with failure of endovascular treatment, percutaneous thrombin injection can be used successfully. We present a case of a large pancreatic pseudoaneurysm managed successfully with percutaneous ultrasound-guided thrombin injection after failure of transarterial management.
Pseudoaneurysms have been reported in almost all the visceral arteries but are most commonly seen in the splenic artery (46%), followed by the renal (22%), hepatic (16.2%), pancreaticoduodenal (1.3%), and gastroduodenal artery (1.5%).
1 Pancreatic pseudoaneurysm is a rare complication of pancreatitis with lethal outcome if ruptured. Other causes include surgery, trauma, and infection. In pancreatitis, the most commonly affected artery is the splenic artery followed by the gastroduodenal artery and the pancreaticoduodenal arcade.
2 Mortality secondary to the pseudoaneurysm depends on duration of the pancreatitis and the vessels involved. If ruptured, mortality rates range from 15 to 50%.
CT angiography of the abdomen is the investigation of choice to assess the severity of pancreatitis, arterial source of the pseudoaneurysm, and associated complications such as the pseudopancreatic cyst. Treatment of pancreatic pseudoaneurysm is either surgical or endovascular. Surgery is traditionally the first-line treatment but is invasive, more challenging, associated with high morbidity and therefore indicated in hemodynamically unstable patients, failed/recurrent pseudoaneurysm after transarterial treatment, and in the presence of necrotizing pancreatitis.
Transarterial endovascular treatment includes embolization using coils, N-butyl cyano acrylate, gelfoam, stent graft, and vascular plug. Transarterial coil placement is preferred with a reported success rate of 92 to 97% and lower overall rate of serious complications. 4, 5 Coil embolization of the aneurysm can be performed if entry into the sac is possible and the neck of aneurysm is narrow. Coiling of the feeding artery is another option especially if the pseudoaneurysm is arising from the gastroduodenal artery. N-butyl cyanoacrylate and gelfoam can be used either alone or in association with coiling. In our case, the neck of the pseudoaneurysm could not identified despite obtaining angiography on different projections, hence aneurysmal coiling was not performed. Also, the feeding artery could not be identified. An alternative option to transarterial management of the pseudoaneurysm is the percutaneous embolization by thrombin injection under US or CT guidance.
Thrombin injection is traditionally used for the treatment of an iatrogenic femoral artery pseudoaneurysm. In 1986, Cope and Zeit first reported the use of percutaneous thrombin injection for the treatment of aneurysms. 6 In recent years, it is also used for percutaneously accessible visceral artery pseudoaneurysm. 7 One report described the use of thrombin injection for treatment of a large pseudoaneurysm measuring 60 Â 44 Â 45 mm and arising from the superior mesenteric artery. 8 Thrombin is a clotting factor formed from prothrombin and allows polymerization of fibrinogen to form fibrin. Percutaneous injection of thrombin is safe if it is injected slowly according to the flow and size of the pseudoaneurysm. Nontarget embolization is one of the common complications associated with thrombin injection. The other potential complication associated with thrombin injection is anaphylaxis; however, with the use of human thrombin, the risk of anaphylaxis has markedly reduced. Furthermore, US-guided injection allows real-time visualization of the needle track and reduces the risk of accidental puncture of the bowel, vessels, and organs. The incidence of recurrent hemorrhage following embolization of pancreatic pseudoaneurysms has been reported to be as high as 30%; therefore, long-term follow-up is necessary in these patients.
In conclusion, percutaneous US-guided thrombin injection could be the first-line treatment following failure of transarterial embolization or when cannulation or identification of the feeding arteries of the pseudoaneurysm is difficult. 
Encapsulated Neisseria meningitidis is a major cause of septicaemia and meningitis world-wide [1] . Most diseasecausing isolates express one of the polysaccharide capsules of serogroups A, B, C, Y and W135. E¡ective vaccines, at least for adults, have been developed based upon the capsular polysaccharides of serogroups A, C, Y and W135 [2] . However, the serogroup B capsule is poorly immunogenic, since it mimics a structure present on the surface of cells of host tissues. Moreover, capsular polysaccharides elicit immune responses with a poor memory, and such vaccines are only e¡ective in children over 2 years of age, whereas the disease is a major problem in younger children. Outer membrane (OM) vesicles containing the major outer membrane proteins (OMPs) have been evaluated as an alternative vaccine [3, 4] . These major OMPs, however, are antigenically diverse and their expression is subject to phase variation. Therefore, these vesicle vaccines provided only limited protection [3, 5] .
Vaccines may improve by the inclusion of minor OMPs, provided that these OMPs are expressed in su¤cient quantities to elicit an immune response and that the resulting antibodies are cross-reactive to a broad range of strains. In addition, such a vaccine component should be expressed either during colonization of the epithelial layers of the upper respiratory tract or during infection of the blood and the meninges. The search for such additional components is greatly facilitated by the recent availability of the genome sequences of two N. meningitidis strains [6, 7] .
In this study, the genome sequences were searched for genes putatively encoding autotransporters. Autotransporters comprise a family of secreted proteins able to translocate themselves over the OM (hence their name) [8] . Their primary sequence harbors an N-terminal signal sequence directing transport over the inner membrane by the Sec system and a C-terminal domain of approximately 30 kDa presumably forming a L-barrel pore in the OM for translocation of the functional domain across the membrane. After translocation, the active domain is cell-surface exposed or secreted into the medium. Their surface exposure renders these types of proteins attractive candidates for application in a vaccine. Moreover, the majority of autotransporters studied to date were implicated in host^pathogen interactions [9] , and Pertactin, an autotransporter of Bordetella pertussis was included in an acellular vaccine currently in use [10] .
The ¢rst autotransporter described was the IgA1 protease of Neisseria gonorrhoeae [11] , homologs of which were also found to be ubiquitous in N. meningitidis isolates [12] . Until recently, information on other genes encoding autotransporters in Neisseria species was limited [13^15] . Here, we report the identi¢cation of seven N. meningitidis genes, apart from iga encoding IgA1 protease, putatively encoding autotransporters. Two of them, homologous to autotransporters of Haemophilus in£uenzae, were cloned. We show that these proteins are expressed in vivo, since they are recognized by antibodies in sera from patients convalescent from meningitis and in sera from healthy carriers.

N. meningitidis strain H44/76 (B:15:P1.7,16) was originally isolated from the cerebrospinal £uid of a meningitis patient in Norway and was shown to belong to the ET-5 group of strains associated with many cases of disease [16] . Cultures of the strain were started from frozen stocks and grown overnight in Tryptic soy broth. Escherichia coli strains used, DH5K, Top10F' (Invitrogen, Groningen, The Netherlands) and BL21(DE3) (Novagen, Madison, WI, USA), were grown on Luria broth (LB) supplemented with 100 Wg ml 31 ampicillin for plasmid maintenance and with 0.5% glucose for full repression of the lac promoter. Cloning and expression vectors used were pCRII-topo (Invitrogen), pET11a and pET16b (Novagen).
The genome sequences of N. meningitidis serogroup A strain Z2491 [6] and serogroup B strain MC58 [7] were searched for genes putatively encoding autotransporters by homology searching using the sequences of 28 autotransporters from 10 di¡erent bacterial species (Table 1) . This list was based upon the sequences described by [16] and [10] , and, additionally, TibA [17] , PssA [18] and Vag8 [19] were included. Database searches were performed using the web sites of The Sanger Centre (http://www. sanger.ac.uk/projects/n_meningitidis/blast_server; this site was used extensively in the period prior to publication of the two genome sequences) and the NCBI Blast and the NCBI Blast of Finished and Un¢nished Microbial Genomes web pages (via http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ blast). The genomes were searched with the tBlastn program [20] , comparing the amino acid sequences of the autotransporters to the genomes translated into six reading frames. Default search matrices were used, but ¢lters for regions of low complexity were switched o¡.
Hits that showed more than 20% similarity over regions larger than 250 amino acid residues were further investigated. The complete ORFs corresponding to the homologous regions were retrieved and compared to sequences in the GenBank database to identify any homologous N. meningitidis sequences previously submitted. The selected Table 1 Autotransporter proteins used for screening of the genomes of N. meningitidis strains MC58 and Z2491
The protein name is given with the GenBank accession numbers in brackets. In some cases the accession numbers refer to the DNA sequence. Also in those cases, searches were performed with the deduced amino acid sequence.
ORFs were also searched for the presence of an N-terminal signal sequence, using the signalP program (http:// www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/signalp-2.0 ; [21] ). However, the N-terminal 100 instead of the recommended 70 amino acid residues were used, since autotransporters tend to have long signal sequences [9] . The C-terminal 350 amino acid residues were analyzed by hand for the presence of a domain that could form a L-barrel structure [8] . Finally, the last nine amino acid residues were compared to the signature sequence for the postulated last L-strand of the [9] , whereby the last three residues were described as the most important [22] . DNA and protein sequence analysis and handling were done using the 
Primers NMB0992Start (ggaattccatatgaacaaaatataccgcatcatttgga), NMB0992End (caagatcttaccactgataaccgacagatgcgga), NMB1985Start (catgccatggaaacaaccgacaaacggacaccga) and NMB1985End (gaagatcttaccagcggtacggtaatttgat) were designed to amplify the ORFs of NMB0992 and NMB1985 from the start codon up to and including the stop codon, without any up-or downstream sequences. They were based upon the Z2491 sequences (available at the time of primer selection), but all showed 100% identity to the comparable MC58 regions at the DNA level. Restriction sites (underlined) were included in the primers to facilitate cloning. In primer NMB0992Start, an NdeI site was included, whereas an NcoI site was included in primer NMB1985Start. In the latter case, this manipulation resulted in the substitution of the second amino acid of the ORF (E for K), which, however, was not expected to disrupt signal sequence function (not shown). In both cases, the primer located at the end of the gene included a BglII site.
PCR reactions were performed in a Biometra PCR machine, using Pwo DNA polymerase (Boehringer Mannheim, Germany) for NMB0992, and the High Fidelity Long Range PCR kit (Boehringer Mannheim) for NMB1985. Reactions were performed in the presence of 1% dimethylsulfoxide, according to the manufacturer's prescription, using genomic DNA of N. meningitidis strain H44/76 as the template. This DNA was puri¢ed using the Qiagen Genomic DNA Midi preps (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to manufacturer's prescription. PCR reactions typically included 30 cycles of ampli¢cation, and the annealing temperature ranged from 55 to 62³C. After cycling, the reaction products were incubated for 30 min at 72³C in the presence of Taq DNA polymerase (MBI Fermentas, St. Leon-Roth, Germany) and fresh nucleotides to extend the products with adenine nucleotides to facilitate TA-cloning (Invitrogen). PCR fragments of the expected length were isolated from gel using the Qiaquick gel isolation kit (Qiagen) and cloned into pCRII-topo (Invitrogen), using the methods described by the manufacturer.
The ORF of NMB0992 was cut from the pCRII-topo vector by restriction with NdeI and BamHI, and cloned into expression vector pET11a restricted with the same enzymes, resulting in plasmid pPU100. The ORF was found to contain an extra BglII site within the coding region, requiring the use of the BamHI site located in the multiple cloning region of pCRII-topo. The ORF of NMB1985 was cut from the pCRII-topo clone by restriction with NcoI and BglII and cloned into expression vector pET16b restricted with NcoI and BamHI, resulting in plasmid pPU200. The plasmids pPU100 and pPU200 contained the ORF under the control of the T7 promoter [23] and were checked by restriction enzyme digestion and sequencing of the fusion sites using universal T7 primers hybridizing to regions up-and downstream of the insertion site.
The ORF of NMB1985 was completely sequenced using the pCRII-topo plasmid containing the PCR product as a template. Primers used were the universal M13 primers and a collection of 13 primers based upon the sequence of NMB1985 of MC58 and the resulting sequences completely covered the ORF on both strands of the DNA. All sequencing reactions were done with the BigDye sequencing kit (Perkin Elmer Applied Biosystems, Nieuwekerk a/d IJssel, The Netherlands) and on an ABI310 sequencer (Perkin Elmer).
NMB1985 in E. coli E. coli strain BL21(DE3), containing an inducible T7 RNA polymerase gene (Novagen), was transformed with plasmids pET16b, pPU100 and pPU200. Fresh overnight cultures were diluted 1:100 in LB with 0.5% glucose and grown to an OD 600 of 0.6. Expression of the genes under the control of the T7 promoter was then induced by adding isopropyl-L-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) to a ¢nal concentration of 0.1 mM, after which incubation was prolonged for another 2 h.
Sera of 10 patients convalescent of meningococcal disease, three healthy carriers of N. meningitidis, and three healthy non-carriers were obtained from the collection of the Department of Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. The infecting strains of the patients and the colonizing strains of the carriers have been serotyped. Four sera of convalescent patients and one non-carrier serum were obtained from the collection of the National Institute of Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, The Netherlands. Antibodies against H. in£uenzae Hia (for H. in£uenzae adherence protein) and Hap (for Haemophilus adhesion and penetration protein) proteins were kindly donated by Dr. St. Geme (Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA).
Proteins were analyzed by SDS^PAGE with an 8% (w/v) polyacrylamide running gel and visualized by staining with Coomassie brilliant blue. Whole cell lysates of equal amounts of cells were loaded.
To detect binding of antibodies to the overproduced proteins, Western blots were made containing proteins from isolated membrane fractions. To obtain the membrane fraction, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 7000Ug and resuspended in a bu¡er of 50 mM TrisĤ Cl, pH 8.0, and 2 mM EDTA, and then disrupted in batches of 20 ml by sonication for 2U15 s in a Branson soni¢er at full power while on ice and with 15 s in between steps. Lysates were cleared from unbroken cells and aggregates by two subsequent centrifugation steps at 1400Ug for 20 min. The membrane fractions (mostly OMs) were pelleted by 5 min centrifugation at 100 000Ug. The resulting pellets were dissolved in 5 mM Tris^HCl, pH 7.6. Samples of the fractions containing equal amounts of proteins, as derived from the OD 280 of the preparations, were separated by SDS^PAGE and blotted upon 0.45 Wm Protran ¢lters (Schleicher and Schuell, Dassel, Germany) using the Protean II minigel blotting system (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Veenendaal, The Netherlands) at 100 V for 1 h. Unspeci¢c binding of antibodies to ¢lters was prevented by overnight incubation in phosphate-bu¡ered saline (PBS), pH 7.0, supplemented with 0.5% Protifar (Nutricia, Zoetermeer, The Netherlands) and 0.1% Tween 20 (Merck and Co., NJ, USA). The sera were diluted 1:500 or 1:750 in the same bu¡er and applied for 1 h to the blots. After extensive washing, the blots were incubated with goat anti-human IgG conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) at a dilution of 1:5000 in the same bu¡er. Binding of antibodies was visualized by chemiluminescence using the ECL kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).
2.7. Protease-accessibility assay E. coli BL21(DE3) cells producing recombinant proteins were harvested by centrifugation at 7000Ug. Pellets were washed in PBS, pH 7.6, and resuspended in 10 mM TrisĤ Cl, pH 7.6, 10 mM MgCl 2 to an OD 600 of 1.0 and put on ice for 10 min. Next, 500-Wl samples of the cell suspensions were incubated with di¡erent amounts of proteinase K or trypsin on ice for 20 min. Protease digestion was stopped by adding 10 Wl of a 100 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl £uo-ride solution in isopropanol, followed by an incubation on ice for 30 min. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 50 Wl of sample bu¡er and proteins were separated by SDS^PAGE. To test whether the protease was active on the intra-cellular proteins, cells were resuspended in a bu¡er containing 10 mM Tris^HCl, pH 7.6, 5 mM EDTA resulting in the disintegration of the OM.
2.8. Immuno£uorescence microscopy E. coli BL21(DE3) cells producing recombinant proteins were harvested by centrifugation. Pellets were washed and resuspended in PBS to an OD 600 of 1.0. 300 Wl cell suspension was incubated for 30 min with 14-mm cover slips that had been coated for 30 min with poly-L-lysine (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). Cover slips with bound cells were washed twice with PBS and ¢xed overnight with 2% formaldehyde in PBS at 4³C. Next, cover slips were washed twice with PBS and then incubated for 1 h at room temperature with PBS supplemented with 0.05% Tween 20 (Sigma) and 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma). Serum 780646 was diluted 1:250 in the same bu¡er and then pre-incubated for 1 h with IPTG-induced E. coli cells containing pET16b, with the amount of cells being equivalent to a 1-ml culture with an OD 600 of 1.0. Cells were removed by centrifugation and the pre-adsorbed serum was incubated with the cover slips for 1 h at room temperature. The cover slips were washed thrice with PBS with 0.05% Tween 20 and subsequently incubated for 1 h with goat anti-human IgG antibodies to which the £uorogenic dye Alexa was coupled (Molecular Probes, Leiden, The Netherlands), diluted 1:300 in PBS with 0.05% Tween 20 and 3% BSA. After washing thrice with PBS with 0.05% Tween 20, cells were ¢xed again with 2% formaldehyde in PBS and washed, after which they were mounted on glass slides. The results were assessed using a £uorescence microscope. As a control, cover slips with cells were incubated with rabbit antibodies against L-lactamase at a dilution of 1:3000 in the same bu¡er as used for the human serum. In these cases, the second antibody was Alexaconjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG antiserum. When applicable, the OMs of cells were permeabilized after the ¢rst ¢xation step by incubating the cover slips for 20 min in PBS with 0.5% Triton X-100 at room temperature, after which the cover slips were washed twice with PBS.

The genome sequences of N. meningitidis serogroup A strain Z2491 and serogroup B strain MC58 were screened for the presence of ORFs putatively encoding proteins with homology to the amino acid sequences of 28 known autotransporters (Table 1) . Initial screening led to the identi¢cation of 14 ORFs, showing homology to one or more autotransporters. Two of them, NMB0545 and NMB0711 and their serogroup A counterparts NMA0724 and NMA0916, were discarded because a signal sequence could not be identi¢ed. One ORF, NMB1540/NMA1739, was discarded because it showed over 80% sequence identity to LbpA, a well-known integral OMP of N. meningitidis [24] . One ORF, NMA0688, which showed homology to the ¢lamentous hemagglutinin of B. pertussis was discarded since its C-terminal sequence did not match the C-terminal signature sequence of autotransporters. Moreover, an accessory protein involved in OM localization of ¢lamentous hemagglutinin has been described [25] , and a homolog of this protein was found adjacent to NMA0688. Interestingly, NMA0688 was only present in the serogroup A sequence. Finally, two ORFs, NMB0497 and NMB01779, only present in the serogroup B sequence and encoding proteins homologous to hemolysins, also had C-terminal sequences di¡ering from the signature sequence and were subsequently discarded. The remaining eight ORFs (Table 2 ) complied with the criteria set: they encoded polypeptides homologous to known autotransporters, had an N-terminal signal sequence and a putative L-barrel domain containing the signature sequence of autotransporters at their C-terminus. The two genomes were also screened with the C-terminal signature sequence as a probe [9] , but this approach did not lead to the identi¢cation of additional putative autotransporters.
Six of the eight ORFs were identi¢ed in both MC58 and Z2491, with homologies between the corresponding ORFs ranging from 85 to 98% sequence identity at the amino acid level ( Table 2 ). The highest identity was found between the ORFs encoding the IgA1 protease [12] . They both were 73% identical to the IgA1 protease of N. gonorrhoeae, the ¢rst autotransporter described in detail [11] .
ORFs homologous to NMB1994 and NMB1998 were not identi¢ed in the serogroup A sequence. However, these ORFs are not located in the three DNA regions speci¢c for MC58 [7] .
The presence of homologs of the identi¢ed N. meningitidis ORFs in the un¢nished N. gonorrhoeae genome sequence was examined using both the nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences for screening. In addition to iga encoding IgA1 protease, homologs of NMB1525 (72% identity at the protein level) and NMB1985 (95% identity) were identi¢ed. A nucleotide sequence homologous to NMB0312 was found, but the ORF was disrupted by premature stop codons. Similarly, a region homologous to NMB1969 was found, but the coding region appeared to be split up into two separate ORFs. No homologs were found of ORFs NMB0992, NMB1994 and NMB1998.
For the cloning of ORFs, serogroup B strain H44/76 was chosen since it has been used for vaccine development [3, 4] . The ORFs NMB0992 and NMB1985 were selected as ¢rst targets for cloning, since they encode proteins homologous to the Hia and Hap proteins of H. in£uenzae, respectively. Like N. meningitidis, H. in£uenzae colonizes the upper respiratory tract upon entry of the human body, and the Hia and the Hap proteins were both suggested to play a role in the colonization of epithelial cell layers [26, 27] . Furthermore, phase-variable expression of both ORFs seemed unlikely because of the complete absence (NMB0992) or limited number (NMB1985) of repeated nucleotide sequences [28] .
DNA fragments containing the ORFs were ampli¢ed from genomic DNA of H44/76 by PCR and amplicons of expected lengths were puri¢ed from the gel and cloned. Their identity was con¢rmed by sequencing. The NMB1985 ORF was completely sequenced. It di¡ered in only two nucleotides from NMB1985 of MC58. The ¢rst substitution, at position 4, resulted from the cloning procedure. The second substitution, at position 3229, resulted in a lysine residue at position 1077 of the amino acid sequence, where there is a glutamate in NMB1985 of MC58. NMB0992 of strain H44/76 was previously sequenced by others (accession number AF226374 [15] ). The deduced amino acid sequence of the ORF is 100% identical to that of MC58. The ORFs of NMB0992 and NMB1985 were cloned into expression vectors resulting in plasmids pPU100 and pPU200, respectively (see Section 2). Expression of the genes in E. coli BL21(DE3) led to the production of recombinant proteins (Fig. 1) . The precursor and mature forms of the Hia-homolog NMB0992 have calculated molecular masses (MWs) of 62.1 and 56.5 kDa, respectively, and a protein with an apparent molecular mass (M r ) corresponding to the precursor was produced (Fig. 1, lane 2) . Additional bands with a much higher M r also appeared on the gel (Fig. 1, lane 2) . These probably represented multimeric complexes of the protein. The precursor and processed forms of the Hap-homolog NMB1985 have calculated MWs of 160 kDa and 155 kDa, respectively, and a band with approximately this M r was observed on the gel (Fig. 1, lane 3) . Attempts to determine the N-terminal sequence of the major protein bands were unsuccessful, most probably because the N-termini were blocked. This suggested that in both cases, the majority of the proteins produced corresponded to the unprocessed precursor forms.
The Hap protein of H. in£uenzae was reported to release its functional domain into the medium by autoproteolytic cleavage [27] . Such release was not observed for the Hia protein [29] . To investigate whether the neisserial homologs are proteolytically cleaved in E. coli, medium of E. coli cells expressing the proteins was concentrated by TCA precipitation and analyzed by SDS^PAGE. In neither case was a secreted product detected in the medium.
To investigate whether the Hia-and Hap-homologs NMB0992 and NMB1985 are immunogenic in humans, a collection of sera was tested in Western blot experiments for the presence of antibodies recognizing the recombinant proteins (see Table 3 ). Twelve of a panel of 14 sera of convalescent patients tested recognized both NMB0992 and NMB1985 of strain H44/76, when produced in E. coli (see serum 790245 in Fig. 2A for an example) . Serum 790269 only recognized NMB1985 (Fig. 2B) , whereas serum 780287 only recognized NMB0992 (Fig. 2C) . Of two patients, serum taken at the day of hospital admittance and thus early in disease, could be tested as well. These sera showed a weaker reaction (Fig. 2, panels A and D) , as compared with the convalescent sera. Moreover, in the case of serum 790767, antibodies recognizing NMB1985 were only present at convalescence (Fig. 2D ). All sera of healthy carriers tested (n = 3) contained antibodies recognizing both proteins (Fig. 3A^C) , although the responses appeared lower than those of patient sera (Table 3) . Of one healthy carrier, two sera were available (Fig. 3C) , taken at 9-month interval, during which two di¡erent N. meningitidis strains colonized this person ( Table 3 ). The sera contained antibodies to both NMB0992 and NMB1985, but the responses to NMB0992 decreased over time, whereas the response to NMB1985 was somewhat boosted, possibly as a result of the colonization by the second strain. Three of the four sera of non-carriers did not contain antibodies recognizing either protein (Fig.  3D^F) , whereas one recognized NMB1985 clearly and NMB0992 faintly (Fig. 3G) . Apparently, the person involved had been a carrier prior to the blood sampling. Taken together, the results demonstrate that the Hiaand Hap-homologs NMB0992 and NMB1985 were expressed by a wide range of N. meningitidis strains during infection and colonization and that these proteins are immunogenic in humans. 
To determine whether the proteins encoded by NMB0992 and NMB1985 were targeted to the OM of E. coli with the functional domains exposed on the bacterial cell surface, two approaches were followed. In the ¢rst approach, protease accessibility of the recombinant proteins in whole cells was assessed. Trypsin (Fig. 4A ) and proteinase K (Fig. 4B ) treatment of whole cells expressing the two recombinant proteins revealed that the higher molecular mass bands of NMB0992 were highly sensitive to these proteases, since the bands were digested at low protease concentrations, at which apparently no other bands were a¡ected (Fig. 4A, lane 4 and Fig. 4B, lane 5) . This would suggest that the putative multimeric forms of NMB0992 were accessible for protease digestion at the cell surface. The monomeric bands of NMB0992 and NMB1985 appeared less protease sensitive, suggesting that these proteins are either not surface exposed, or are intrinsically resistant to proteases.
In the second approach, serum 780646, which contained antibodies recognizing both NMB0992 and NMB1985, was used in immuno£uorescence microscopy. This serum was selected on the basis of its limited cross-reaction with E. coli bands in Western blot, and background binding to E. coli proteins was further diminished by pre-adsorption of the serum with E. coli cells containing pET16b. Next, it was incubated with E. coli cells producing either recombinant NMB0992 or NMB1985, or containing the empty vector. Control cells, containing the empty vector, were hardly stained by the serum (Fig. 5A) . The serum very clearly labelled cells expressing recombinant NMB1985, the Hap homolog (Fig. 5C) . Immunostaining of cells expressing the Hia homolog was less clear (Fig. 5B) , but staining was above the level of that of the controls. The integrity of the cells was tested by incubation with anti- serum against the periplasmic protein L-lactamase. This serum stained some of the cells expressing the recombinant proteins, but the level of labelling was lower than with the patient serum (Fig. 5D^F) . The L-lactamase antiserum could e¡ectively stain cells when the OM was disrupted with Triton X-100 (results not shown). These results indicate that antigenic domains of the recombinant proteins were exposed on the cell surface.
The class of autotransporter proteins might include interesting vaccine constituents since most of them appear to be involved in host^pathogen interactions [30] . A systematic search of the recently published genome sequences of two N. meningitidis strains revealed the presence of eight ORFs putatively encoding autotransporters in the genome of serogroup B strain MC58, six of which were also present in that of serogroup A strain Z2491. The di¡erent repertoire of autotransporter-encoding genes in the two genomes suggests that additional autotransporters might be identi¢ed when more disease isolates are screened. Such additional autotransporters might be less interesting for vaccine development because of lack of conservation. The genome of N. gonorrhoeae strain FA1090 contained only three intact homologs of the N. meningitidis autotransporters. Two disrupted homologs were identi¢ed, which might be intact in other isolates.
Some of the ORFs identi¢ed have appeared in the literature or the GenBank database, apart from their presence in the sequenced genomes. The iga of N. meningitidis isolates have been studied extensively [12] . The nucleotide sequences of NMB0312 and NMB1525 have been identi¢ed by the presence of sequence repeats [13] , indicative of phase-variable expression. A second, unpublished entry was found for NMB0312 (accession number AF118122) and during the preparation of this paper, NMB0312 (designated AutA) was reported to encode a CD4
T-cell and B-cell stimulatory antigen [31] . The authors also identi¢ed Fig. 3 . Western blots of membrane preparations of E. coli BL21(DE3) strains expressing recombinant proteins NMB0992 and NMB1985 from pPU100 and pPU200, respectively. Blots were incubated with the sera of healthy carriers (panels A^C), or non-carriers (panels D^F). Panel C shows two blots incubated with the sera of a carrier taken at a 9-month interval, as indicated. Bands corresponding to NMB0992 and NMB1985 are labelled with asterisks and dots, respectively. Fig. 2 . Western blots of membrane preparations of E. coli BL21(DE3) strains expressing recombinant proteins NMB0992 and NMB1985 from pPU100 and pPU200, respectively. Blots were incubated with the patient sera indicated underneath the panels, taken either at hospital admittance or at convalescence, as indicated. Bands corresponding to NMB0992 and NMB1985 are labelled with asterisks and dots, respectively. NMB1525 (designated AutB) as a homolog of NMB0312 and demonstrated that antibodies against this protein failed to react with N. meningitidis grown in vitro. NMB1969 and NMB1985 were very recently entered in the database (accession numbers AJ277537 and AJ242535) without published account. Finally, NMB0992 (designated NhhA [1] ) was identi¢ed as a putative vaccine candidate based upon its homology to Hia of H. in£uenzae [14] and in a genome-wide screen for antigens [15] . No database entries were found for NMB1994 and NMB1998.
In a ¢rst study of the vaccine potential of N. meningitidis autotransporters, we focused on two ORFs, NMB0992 and NMB1985, because they encode proteins that are very homologous to the Hia [26] and Hap [32] proteins of H. in£uenzae. Moreover, N. meningitidis and H. in£u-enzae both colonize the upper respiratory tract, and it was suggested that the proteins of H. in£uenzae might play a role in that process by functioning as adhesins [26, 27] .
Expression of NMB0992 of serogroup B strain H44/76 in E. coli yielded a protein with an M r of 62 kDa, most probably representing the unprocessed full-length precursor protein, and two bands with M r s of over 200 kDa. These higher M r s bands might represent multimeric complexes, which appear to be surface-exposed, as suggested by the protease-accessibility experiments. Consistently, the immuno£uorescence experiments indicated that at least a proportion of the recombinant protein produced was cellsurface-exposed.
The Hia homolog of strain MC58 was cloned in an independent study [14] , and antibodies raised against this protein recognized a band with an M r of over 200 kDa. Higher MW complexes were not observed when Hia of H. in£uenzae was expressed in either H. in£uenzae or E. coli [29] . The Hia protein and its neisserial homolog di¡er considerably in size, being 1098 and 591 amino acid residues long, respectively. The C-terminal 318 residues of Hia ¢t with the model proposed for the autotransporter trans- locator domain [8] since they putatively constitute a Lbarrel of 14 amphipathic L-strands. In a sequence alignment, the translocator domain of NMB0992 appears to miss about 140 residues, which would result in the loss of about six to eight L-strands. The remaining number of L-strands would be too low for the formation of Lbarrel with a pore of su¤cient size to allow for the translocation of a polypeptide chain. Possibly, multimer formation could result in the formation of a L-barrel with a larger pore size. Such a multimeric organization would represent a new type of molecular organization for the autotransporter L-barrel domain, and would be reminiscent of the multimeric L-barrel formed in the OM by the TolC protein [33] . Like many of the autotransporters [9] , the Hia protein of H. in£uenzae and its neisserial homologs were predicted to contain a long signal sequence of Fig. 5 . Immuno£uorescence microscopy of E. coli BL21(DE3) cells expressing recombinant proteins NMB0992 and NMB1985 from pPU100 and pPU200, respectively. Cells expressing recombinant proteins were incubated with patient serum 780646 or polyclonal rabbit serum recognizing periplasmic L-lactamase. Binding of antibodies was detected with anti-human or anti-rabbit IgG antibodies, respectively, both coupled to the £uorogenic dye Alexa. Cells were visualized by £uorescence microscopy. Panels A and D: background binding of serum to E. coli BL21(DE3) containing pET16b. Panels B and E: binding of serum to E. coli BL21(DE3) containing pPU100. Panel C and F: binding of serum to E. coli BL21(DE3) containing pPU200. approximately 50 amino acid residues. When compared to normal signal sequences, they seemed extended at the Nterminus with aromatic and hydrophobic residues near the N-terminus and a signature sequence IAVSELAR preceding the charged N-domain [9] .
The putative signal sequence of the Hap homologs of the Neisseriae are predicted to be 42 amino acid residues long, which is markedly longer than the 25 residues of the H. in£uenzae Hap signal sequence [22] . These signal sequences, however, do not have the characteristics of the long signal sequences of autotransporters. The neisserial Hap-like proteins showed the highest homology with Hap of H. in£uenzae in the functional domain (65% similarity), with a serine protease consensus motif located at the same position in the protein sequence. The C-terminal domains are less homologous (57% similarity). Thus, the functional domains of the proteins might share a similar function, most probably in adhesion to host cells [27] , whereas the mode of translocation to the cell surface and the proteolytic cleavage of the proteins could be di¡erent. For H. in£uenzae, Hap autoproteolytic processing was observed upon expression in E. coli [22] , which was not the case for NMB1985 of H44/76. This might indicate that autoproteolytic cleavage of the N. meningitidis protein does not occur. Alternatively, the majority of protein produced was not properly localized in E. coli and appeared in inclusion bodies. Nevertheless, immuno£uorescence microscopy suggested that at least a proportion of the protein produced was exposed at the cell surface. A possibly important difference between the neisserial Hap homologs is that the NMA0457 protein of serogroup A strain Z2491 contains an RGD motif, which is a binding site for host proteoglycans in ¢lamentous hemagglutinin of B. pertussis [34] . This motif is absent in the serogroup B Hap homologs and in the H. in£uenzae Hap.
Sera of convalescent patients, each infected by a di¡er-ent N. meningitidis isolate, contained antibodies that recognized either NMB0992 or NMB1985, or, in most cases, both proteins. Apparently, during infection both proteins were expressed by most of the N. meningitidis isolates. Moreover, limited antigenic variation is suggested, since antibodies in most tested patient sera recognized the recombinant proteins cloned from strain H44/76. The presence of genes encoding Hap-homologs in clinical isolates had not been studied to date, but is clearly demonstrated here. The gene encoding the Hia-homolog of MC58 was cloned in two independent studies [14, 15] and both showed sequence variation of the Hia homologs in N. meningitidis. However, in both studies, antibodies raised against the recombinant protein appeared to be bactericidal and to recognize proteins from various strains. The data presented here add to this information the notion of expression during infection and the inter-strain cross-reactivity of human antibodies. In view of the reported sequence variation, this cross-reactivity may be somewhat surprising, but apparently the proteins share common epitopes that might be functionally important. Interestingly, we found no binding of antibodies raised against the C-terminal domains of the Hap and Hia proteins of H. in£uenzae to the recombinant N. meningitidis H44/76 proteins (results not shown).
Included in our tests were sera from healthy carriers that contained antibodies against both recombinant proteins, suggesting that the proteins were also expressed during asymptomatic colonization of the upper respiratory tract.
In conclusion, we have identi¢ed the repertoire of autotransporters present in the genomes of MC58 and Z249. Further characterization of two of these genes, encoding homologs of the Hia and Hap proteins of H. in£uenzae, showed that these proteins were most likely present during infection and colonization. Therefore, these proteins are interesting candidates to be included in a vaccine against N. meningitidis.
Mesh prostheses are an essential component of successful ventral hernia repairs. Mesh is used to produce tensionfree repairs, where possible, and offers the best opportunity to restore abdominal wall integrity. Open repairs without mesh are associated with hernia recurrence in 24% to 54% of patients. [1] [2] [3] Mesh placement reduces hernia recurrences to 24% to 32% in open repairs 3, 4 and 5% to10% in laparoscopic repairs.
Mesh prostheses are composed of biologic materials from human and animal dermis (autoplastic) or synthetic materials (alloplastic). Synthetic mesh prostheses are further divided into 3 groups based on porosity. 5 Type I mesh is macroporous with pore sizes Ͼ10 microns, eg, polypropylene. Type II mesh is microporous with pore sizes Ͻ10 microns, eg, expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE). Type III mesh is a composite structure with both microand macroporous components. Polypropylene material causes a local inflammatory response when in contact with host tissues. This combined with its large pore sizes allows for maximal in-growth of connective tissue and blood vessels from the abdominal wall into the mesh material, increasing the strength of ventral hernia repairs. Expanded PTFE is biologically inert and does not cause a host inflammatory response. The submicronic pore sizes of ePTFE mesh materials further impede in-growth of host tissues, thereby, limiting adhesion formation. 6 Composite mesh prostheses are manufactured to strategically position these materials on different surfaces to selectively promote and impede host tissue in-growth to produce a strong ventral hernia repair with minimal adhesions.
Composite mesh prostheses are placed in the intraperitoneal position so that the parietal surface contacts the abdominal wall to promote tissue in-growth, and the visceral surface acts as a long-term barrier for the viscera. Clinical studies have shown that composite mesh materials are associated with short hospital stays, moderate complication rates, low infection rates, and low hernia recurrence rates. [7] [8] [9] The clinical success of composite mesh has led to several commercially available materials. The aim of this study was to evaluate a novel composite mesh with an absorbable polydioxanone (PDO) memory ring in a porcine model of open ventral hernia repair.

Sixteen female Yorkshire pigs (35kg to 45kg) were implanted with composite mesh. Animals were randomized for explantation at 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks. All animal protocols were approved by our medical center's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and conformed to Federal Care and Use of Laboratory Animals guidelines.
Animals were implanted with Ventrio Hernia Patch (Bard Davol, Inc. Warwick, RI), an oval-shaped composite mesh (11cm x 14cm). This composite hernia patch combines 3 layers of mesh with an absorbable polydioxanone ring that aids in positioning (Figure 1) . The parietal surface consists of a double layer of polypropylene. A central opening between the polypropylene layers creates a positioning pocket for the placement of fixation devices. The visceral surface of the mesh is made of ePTFE. The most novel component is an absorbable PDO monofilament incorporated at the periphery of the mesh. This ring allows the flexible hernia patch to return to a flat position against the abdominal wall facilitating optimal positioning. Because this memory function is no longer necessary after the mesh is secured to the abdominal wall, the ring undergoes hydrolysis in vivo and is completely absorbed, decreasing the amount of foreign material in the abdomen.
Following overnight fasting, animals underwent anesthetic induction and endotracheal intubation for surgery. The surgical field was prepped with topical antimicrobial agents and draped to maintain sterility, and midline laparotomy incisions were made. The mesh was placed intraperitoneally and fixed at the periphery with absorbable fasteners at 1-cm intervals. Eight transfascial polydioxanone sutures were placed circumferentially. Each mesh was positioned at the midline, and the overlying fascia was closed primarily with polydioxanone suture in a running fashion. The skin edges were reapproximated with skin staples. A dry, sterile dressing and sulfadiazine cream were placed over the incision. Postoperatively, animals were placed in a recovery area and given appropriate analgesia. Animals had free access to food and water throughout the study duration.
Animals were euthanized at 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks following mesh implantation (Nϭ4 for each time period). Immediately following euthanasia, animals underwent laparoscopic evaluation of adhesions. An 11-mm trocar was inserted in the right lower quadrant, and pneumoperitoneum was established. A 10-mm, 30°laparoscope was used to directly visualize intraabdominal adhesions. Previously validated quantitative and qualitative scales were used to measure adhesions. The Modified Diamond Scale 10 was used to measure the proportion of mesh covered with adhesions (Table 1) , and a scale validated by Garrard and colleagues 11 was used to measure tenacity ( Table 2 ). 
The length and width of each mesh prosthesis was measured at baseline and immediately following explantation. From these measurements, a percentage mesh contracture was calculated for the mesh length, mesh width, and mesh area for each explanted mesh (Nϭ4 for each group). Percentage contracture was calculated by the following formula:
baseline measurement ϫ 100
Immediately following euthanasia, mesh prostheses were explanted by excising each graft along with the overlying full-thickness abdominal wall. Portions of the mesh-abdominal wall complexes explanted from each animal were sectioned, fixed in formalin, and embedded in paraffin or plastic blocks. Replicate 4-m to 6-m sections were cut and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Masson's trichrome. Slides from each animal were divided into quadrants, and 3 fields from each quadrant were selected for cell counting. Twelve high-power fields (40X magnification) were evaluated for each animal, and group means were calculated for each time point (Nϭ48 high power fields per group). Each field was independently scored for the presence of inflammatory cells, vascular structures, and fibroblasts by 2 observers who were blinded to specimen group assignments.
Immediately following explantation, mesh-abdominal wall specimens were placed in normal saline. Skin and soft tissues were removed, leaving a thin, connective tissue lamina on the polypropylene surface of the mesh. Fixation constructs were removed. The degree of polypropylene mesh incorporation into the abdominal wall was assessed by measuring the force required to separate the connective tissue lamina from the underlying mesh (T-peel force). Specimens were cut into 2-cm x 7-cm strips, and T-peel forces were measured at a constant displacement of 20mm per minute. Explanted mesh was tested at 2 weeks (Nϭ23), 4 weeks (Nϭ20), 8 weeks (Nϭ17), and 12 weeks (Nϭ20) following implantation.
The mechanical properties of the absorbable PDO ring component of each mesh were evaluated in triplicates at baseline and 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks (Nϭ12 specimens for each group). These longitudinal measurements were used to quantify the amount of PDO ring degradation. The rings were dissected from the explanted mesh and maintained in normal saline before testing. Ultimate tensile strength was calculated from the peak load and initial diameter for each ring sample. Ring material from nonimplanted mesh was also tested for baseline values.
Data are presented as mean values with standard deviations or proportions. Kruskal-Wallis tests were used for ordinal data, and ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc tests were used for interval data. All tests were 2-tailed, and significance was considered PՅ.05.

There were no operative or postoperative complications. All animals survived to the designated endpoints by group (2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks) and were healthy throughout the study. Laparoscopic inspections showed that composite mesh prostheses were securely positioned and flat against the abdominal wall with no exposure of the parietal mesh surface. 
Quantitative and qualitative measurements of intraabdominal adhesions were performed using the Modified Diamond Scale and a tenacity scale, respectively. The overall mean Diamond score for all groups was 0.63Ϯ0.62 (Nϭ16), and the overall mean tenacity score was 1.94Ϯ1.0 (Nϭ16). Diamond and tenacity scores were not statistically different among groups (Pϭ.38 and Pϭ.51, respectively). All groups included animals with no adhesions: 2 week (25%), 4 week (75%), 8 week (50%), and 12 week (25%). Of the animals that developed adhesions, all measured Ͻ25%, and most were filmy omental attachments. See Tables 3 and 4 and Figure 2 for adhesion scores.
The width, length, and surface area of explanted mesh were compared with baseline measurements, and percentage of contraction for these dimensions was calculated for each time point. The percentage surface area contraction was 4% at 2 weeks, 19% at 4 weeks, 16% at 8 weeks, and 19% at 12 weeks. Mesh length contraction was slightly greater than width contraction at 2 weeks, and width contraction was greater than length contraction at 4, 8, and 12 weeks following implantation. See Figure 3 for mesh contraction results.
The tissue architecture was evaluated by light microscopy at 40X magnification. At 2 weeks, there was a preponderance of lymphocytes and other inflammatory cells with disorganized collagen fibers. By 12 weeks, there were fewer inflammatory cells, and the tissues had undergone marked remodeling with well-organized collagen fibers. 

The force required (T-peel force) to separate host connective tissue lamina from the mesh was measured to assess the in-growth of host tissues into the mesh. T-peel force was highest at 2 weeks, 9.13Ϯ3 Newtons, and lowest at 8 weeks, 4.76Ϯ2 Newtons. There was no significant difference in T-peel forces among the groups (Pϭ.29). See Figure 7 for T-peel force measurements.
The absorbable ring component of the composite mesh underwent tensiometric testing to assess ring degradation. The ultimate tensile strength was calculated from the peak load and an initial ring diameter. The ultimate tensile strength at baseline was 367Ϯ5 Mpa and progressively decreased in each group following explantation: 275.2Ϯ49 Mpa at 2 weeks, 87Ϯ18 Mpa at 4 weeks, and 9.7Ϯ7 Mpa at 8 weeks (PϽ.001). The strain and modulus were measured and followed similar trends. All mechanical test samples at 12 weeks had degraded such that no mechanical tests could be successfully completed. The percentage of degradation of the PDO ring compared to baseline measurements was 25% at 2 weeks, 76.2% at 4 weeks, 97.4% at 8 weeks, and 100% at 12 weeks. See Figure 8 for measurements of the internal PDO ring.
Our preclinical, observational study evaluated a new composite mesh for soft tissue reconstruction, the Ventrio Hernia Patch (Bard Davol, Inc. Warwick, RI). Adhesions were absent in some animals at each time point. Animals that developed adhesions were found to have thin, filmy omental attachments. Histological evaluation showed progressive host tissue in-growth into the mesh with increased vascular structures and fibroblasts at 8 weeks and 12 weeks compared to earlier time points. Two features were found to promote easy handling of the mesh and proper placement in the intraperitoneal space. The positioning pocket created by the polypropylene bi-layer facilitated appropriate mesh fixation with fasteners. The internal PDO ring enabled the mesh to maintain a flat orientation during placement. This PDO ring also underwent complete degradation by 12 weeks.
Ventral hernias are common complications following open laparotomies with a reported incidence ranging from 2% to 20%. 1, [12] [13] [14] [15] Mesh prostheses offer the lowest rate of hernia recurrence. There are many mesh products available for use during ventral hernia repairs; however, there is no consensus regarding the optimal graft because of the wide variability in patients as well as hernias. The ideal mesh material provides a strong repair with minimal adverse effects resulting from the foreign material within the abdomen. The use of composite mesh prostheses placed intraperitoneally seeks to accomplish aggressive host tissue response at the parietal surface to strengthen the repair while minimizing adhesions caused by contact on the visceral surface.
The composite mesh evaluated in this study incorporates 3 layers of mesh material with an absorbable ring to maximize strength for the hernia repair. Two layers of polypropylene material make up the parietal surface. The macroporosity of polypropylene is shown to promote in-growth of host tissue within the mesh, which adds to the longevity of strength for the hernia repair. 8, 9 This study evaluated this property mechanically by measuring the force required to separate host connective tissue from the mesh (T-peel force) and histologically by assessing cell types in the mesh following implantation. The T-peel force was highest at 2 weeks, indicating a strong initial mesh-abdominal association. The T-peel force was relatively weakest at 8 weeks but increased again by 12 weeks. The T-peel force at 2 weeks is likely a result of an early host inflammatory response. The relatively lower T-peel force at 8 weeks may be indicative of a window phase in which the acute inflammatory response has subsided and the process of remodeling has begun. This theory is supported by the progressive increase of vascular structures and well-organized fibroblasts at 12 weeks (Figures 5 and 6) . As the remodeling process continues (beyond 12 weeks), the T-peel force would likely exceed values observed at 2 weeks.
The visceral surface of the composite mesh was made of ePTFE, a microporous material that inhibits tissue attachment and limits the formation of intraabdominal adhesions between viscera and the mesh surface. 8, 9 Results of this study show that many animals in each group formed no adhesions at all, including 75% at 4 weeks and 50% at 8 weeks. Of animals that formed adhesions, many of them were filmy omental adhesions that were easily broken with blunt dissection. Animal studies have reported Modified Diamond scores of 0.8 to 1.6 associated with ePTFE and polypropylene mesh materials. 16 The mean Modified Diamond score for the current study was lower at 0.63Ϯ0.62.
The composite mesh evaluated in this study was most innovative in the components designed to ensure appropriate placement within the intraperitoneal cavity and adequate fixation of the mesh to the abdominal wall. The positioning pocket created by the polypropylene bi-layer helped to ensure adequate fixation at the mesh periphery. The absorbable PDO ring component ensured the mesh maintained a flat orientation against the abdominal wall during placement. The ring was also completely degraded by 12 weeks, leaving less foreign material in the abdomen and no risk for long-term complications caused by this component. These features are significant advances in composite mesh design and aid in adequate mesh placement and fixation, both of which are required for successful hernia repairs.
Contraction of mesh prostheses is well documented, and the cause is contraction of collagen and connective tissue as host tissues become incorporated in the woven mesh interface. Radiologic measurements have shown 20% mesh contraction 10 months after implantation in patients. 6 Gonzalez and colleagues 17 examined mesh contraction 3 months following implantation in a porcine model. Contraction of polyester mesh was between 5% and 24%, and contraction of polypropylene mesh was between 15% and 65%. Our data show a mean 19% mesh area contraction at 12 weeks. The structure of the composite hernia patch may be responsible for this relatively low contraction profile compared to that of other prostheses.
Ventrio Hernia Patch incorporates 3 layers of mesh material with an absorbable PDO ring. Each layer performs a unique functional role to increase the strength of ventral hernia repairs while minimizing adhesion formation and mesh contraction. This study showed that the visceral ePTFE layer was associated with minimal adhesion formation. The parietal polypropylene layers contributed to aggressive in-growth of host tissues and provided a positioning pocket that aided in mesh fixation. The PDO ring aided in mesh placement and was completely absorbed by 12 weeks. This study provides sound evidence to support prospective clinical trials examining this composite mesh in clinical settings.
The management of gastroschisis has evolved in recent times with many institutions utilising a delayed primary closure approach with the use of a silo. We present a case with a large defect where this technique could not be employed and describe an alternative approach.
A female baby was born at 35+1 week gestation by emergency caesarian section due to foetal distress. The diagnosis of gastroschisis was known antenatally. Her birth weight was 2.18 kg which placed her just above the 25th centile. She required minimal resuscitation and was transferred to our institution for further management.
At arrival, the stomach, small bowel, large bowel, ovaries and fallopian tubes were visible outside to the abdominal cavity. The bowel was matted, but well perfused with no visible atresia or perforation. The defect was to the right of the umbilicus and was large. There was significant abdomino-viscero size discrepancy and primary closure was deemed inappropriate. A size 5 "medicina" silo was placed over the bowel and after a period of 36 hours reduction of the bowel was commenced.
Reduction of the bowel was difficult and only on day 9 of life was the bowel reduced sufficiently for a plan for later definitive closure. This plan was expedited when turbid fluid was noted around the bowel in the silo, with cellulitis of the surrounding abdominal wall. The baby was pyrexial with an elevated C reactive protein of 122mg/L, cultures taken at the time subsequently grew Burkholderia Cepacia.
The baby was transferred to theatre for further assessment, the silo removed and the bowel washed with copious amounts of saline. The bowel appeared healthy, but there was still a significant abdomino-viscero size discrepancy. The diameter of the defect was now 5.5cm and fascial closure or even skin closure was not possible. The decision was made to patch the defect using a 1mm gortex patchwith two concentrically placed 3/0 prolene purse string su-tures to allow gradual closure of the defect. The patch was secured to the skin and fascia with 3.0 prolene horizontal mattress sutures to all layers of the abdominal wall with felt pledglets to protect the skin (Fig. 1) .
The baby returned to the neonatal intensive care unit paralysed and ventilated and was extubated after 48hours. The inner prolene purse string was tied on the fourth postoperative day reducing the defect by 1.5cm. This was well tolerated and the outer prolene suture was subsequently tied on the sixth postoperative day leaving a <3cm defect in the abdominal wall (Fig. 2) . Two days later, a fascial and skin closure was performed in theatre with removal of the gortex patch (Fig. 3) .
Enteral feeding was commenced on day 22; full enteral intake was achieved by day 62 of life. She was discharged on day 70 of life with a good cosmetic appearance of her neo-umbilicus (Fig. 4) . She has continued to do well requring no readmission and is thriving. 
The management of neonates born with gastroschisis has changed over the past few decades with a shift from primary fascial closure to staged closure with the use of a spring loaded preformed silo. These silos can be placed without anaesthetic at the cotside and delayed fascial closure performed when appropriate [1] . In selected cases, it is even possible to subsequently remove the silo and perform a sutureless closure at the bedside [2] .
Although the spring loaded preformed silos have many advantages, but we believe that they can make the diameter of the defect larger There have been various methods reported to deal with closure of a large or complex gastroschisis. These include prosthetic materials such as sugisis [3] , gortex [4] , silastic silo [5] and autologous materials such as umbilical cord [6] , dura, musculo-cutaneous flaps and meshed skin grafts [7] reported.
The synthetic agents have the disadvantage of infection causing significant morbidity and necessitating the removal of the patch in some cases. Surgisis has the reported advantage of causing tissue ingrowth and has the theoretical advantage of "growth" but reports have suggested a higher reoccurrence rate with its use. The autologous tissues although intuitively attractive can be problematic in small babies who have a paucity of available tissue.
Our neonate had a very large defect in comparison to the size of her abdomen and the presence of infection precluded the use of other techniques. Gortex was chosen as a temporaizing measure and the concentric purse string suture was devised to reduce the size of the defect for future closure. Sequentially tieing the two sutures at the bedside allowed us to progressively stretch the abdominal wall and close the defect. This progressive tension on the tissues acted like a form of tissue expansion, but in reverse. This technique was performed at the bedside and enabled us to eradicate the sepsis before returning to theatre for definitive closure. Without the use of this innovation, closure would have involved several operative procedures and anaesthetics.
In conclusion, our novel technique for closure of a large gastroschisis defect is easy to perform. It should be considered when the clinician is faced with a defect he cannot obtain skin or fascial closure once he has removed a silo.
and productive adulthood. 6 As described by Bernat and Resnick, and others in this supplement, PYD offers opportunities for researchers and practitioners to better understand the contribution of social and institutional factors to both adolescent health promotion and vulnerability. 4 PYD also affirms that healthy development requires meaningful involvement of adolescents in their communities, and in the programs and institutions that serve them. 7 However, community and consumer participation in traditionally bureaucratic medical institutions is not always welcomed, for both organization-cultural and practical reasons. 8 Problemoriented public health funding and reimbursement for services tend to result in problem-focused approaches, with little incentive to adopt PYD practices. 9 When PYD practices are adopted, they are sometimes misunderstood as an alternative to, rather than as an enhancement of, current models of public health or primary care. 10 Thus, healthcare settings are not commonly considered as partners for youth serving agencies in PYD programming.
Youth serving agencies, themselves, may face obstacles in PYD programming because of the unmet need for a stable and well-trained workforce that has the knowledge and competence to address the myriad We gratefully thank the following people for their major contributions to the work described in this article: Janet Kelley, MSW, Lissette Resto-Brooks, MSW, and Elizabeth Goodman, MSW, of Partnership for Afterschool Education; Angela Diaz, MD, MPH, of the Mount Sinai Adolescent Health Center; Robert Eleteza of SafeHorizon; and Marie Louis and Paul Josephson of Community Counseling and Mediation. We also thank Claude Chemtob, PhD, of Mount Sinai School of Medicine for his intellectual contributions and trauma expertise.
challenges facing both urban and rural youth. [11] [12] [13] Staff shortages can lead to a focus on short-term, day-to-day operational problems, which in turn impede the development of far-sighted goals such as staff development. 11 As a result, many youth worker jobs are part-time, which often create unstable staffing structures that make it more difficult for programs to deliver on the PYD principle that youth benefit from long-term relationships with concerned adults. Thus, Noonan 11 has described working with youth in the United States as a developing, but still unrealized career track, in contrast to the UK, Irish, and Australian contexts in which youth work is a recognized and developing professional field.
14, 15 The youth worker field in this country faces a number of problems, including inadequate funding, an "elastic supply of low paid workers," and "negative return" on investment in advanced training (ie, the costs of continuing education exceed the salary benefits that can result). 11(p5) To become a recognized professional field, youth workers require (1) the identification of a core knowledge base, (2) a career "matrix that links roles, qualifications and compensation," 11(p2) (3) a system of training, (4) a training approval system, and (5) a registry of practitioners.
Camino and Zeldin identify the creation of partnerships for capacity building as a key strategy for organizational and staff competency development.
12 While the two efforts described in this article do not address all of the challenges posed by Noonan, 11 they serve, in the spirit of Camino and Zeldin's 12 recommendation, as practical exemplars of ways that core competencies can be defined and developed in youth service settings. This article presents two examples of partnerships involving a traditional adolescent health setting and other community organizations that were designed to enhance the capacity of community-based youth workers to engage in PYD. This increased capacity for PYD programming provides added value to community organizations in program marketing, participant recruitment and retention, staff recruitment and retention, as well as effectiveness studies. The first of these is not an example of PYD, per se, since youth involvement was not an essential element of its activities. Nonetheless, it is included in this supplement on PYD as a public health strategy because some organizations will find themselves needing this kind of capacity-building before attempting to institute full PYD programming.
The Mount Sinai Adolescent Health Center (AHC) is the nation's largest comprehensive adolescent-specific health center, with more than 40,000 visits annually. The AHC provides primary care and mental health services to urban teens and conducts research, medical education training, and technical assistance, all intended to promote the health of adolescents. 4 A core component of AHC's mission is to influence adolescent health through the development of strategic partnerships within the youth serving and youth development communities. In New York City, where the capacity-building efforts were conducted, estimates of the number of children and youth involved in afterschool programs vary greatly, but may exceed a halfmillion. 16 A number of efforts to strengthen YD programs have been initiated through groups such as The After-School Corporation and the Fund for the City of New York's Youth Development Institute. Two community-based partnerships collaborated with the AHC.
• Partnership for After School Education Partnership for After School Education (PASE) was founded in January 1993, when 60 New York City youth agency leaders and funders were convened to address serious issues in the overall quality and consistency of critical youth services in the city. Services lacked mechanisms to share effective program practices, to explore issues of concern to practitioners, and to develop resources. As a peer-led network that now includes more than 1,200 participating youth-serving agencies, PASE was designed to develop a strong service-system for youth through professional development of the field and to involve young people in public policy development. Formed with the explicit aim of developing the professional field in YD work, PASE was the locus for, and initiator of, the Partners in Healing (PIH) program.
•
Partnership for Youth and Community Empowerment (PYCE) is a partnership of three youth-serving organizations in the North Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, New York. The PYCE was a local community development partnership, while the AHC was the center for excellence that provided it with technical assistance, in the statewide Assets Coming Together for Youth initiative described by Riser and colleagues elsewhere in this supplement. 17 Thus, while PASE represented a vast network of more than 1,000 youth-serving agencies across New York City, the PYCE represented a much smaller group defined by a neighborhood. Each of these coalitions partnered with the AHC in ways that are illustrative for other public health entities interested in increasing the capacity of community-based groups, large or small, to engage in PYD programming.
• Methods
The goal of Partners in Healing (PIH) was to build capacity among front-line youth workers by improving their ability to help young people living in urban settings address traumatic life experiences. Without attempting to turn youth workers into mental health professionals, the PIH aimed to build on their existing strengths to engage trauma-affected young people and, where appropriate, to help them build bridges to professional mental health services. AHC's role was the creation of a youth worker guidebook, developed concurrently during a yearlong series of trainings for youth workers. The youth workers represented 31 community-based organizations, and the training was conducted by PASE and SafeHorizon, a leading nonprofit, victim assistance, advocacy, and violence prevention organization.
To create a guidebook that was both well-informed and useful, the AHC recognized the need to identify existing best practices in the fields of PYD and youth work, and mental health and adolescent psychologic trauma, which would require expertise in youth work, program development, administration, youth communications, professional development, and social work. Many expert practitioners are not accustomed to distilling heuristics from their accumulated "practice wisdom" and articulating practice principles. 18 Youth work training is generally hands-on, relying on having a supervisor directly involved in the service setting. While the PIH youth work experts actively train and supervise many youth workers every year, a significant challenge was to translate their practice wisdom into written principles and practical solutions. While one task was to tap their general expertise, a far more difficult task was to identify ways in which youth workers can respond appropriately to the common trauma-related issues of urban youth, without overstepping the limitations of their settings and roles.
To accomplish this, AHC engaged expert practitioners in the process of reflective inquiry. 19 This approach has been applied to understanding and iterating daily practice in human services, [20] [21] [22] [23] administration, 24 and knowledge development. 18, 25 It assumes that (1) theorizing, thinking, and action are not distinct activities separated in time, but occur concurrently, and (2) effective practitioners solve practical problems by drawing on experience through an analogical, nonlinear process. Thus, the AHC's work involved drawing on experts' abilities to reflect on specific practice problems and strategies and solutions that emerge everyday in youth work.
To scope out the project, a PIH planning group (PIHPG) was convened, composed of regional experts in the fields of youth work, training, social work education, mental health, and trauma. In addition to PASE staff and AHC staff and faculty, the PIHPG included the Director of Youth Communications and a psychologist from the Mount Sinai Medical Center, two social workers from SafeHorizon, a professor of social work from New York University, and a social worker from the Mental Health Association of New York City. Planning sessions with the PIHPG were used by the AHC to conduct a state of the field assessment related to trauma and training challenges encountered in youth service settings, a gaps analysis, and a needs assessment. The PIHPG remained involved in steering the PIH project, but its initial work was to develop two key elements of the guidebook.
An outline for the guidebook content and for the organization was generated from the state of the field assessment. Content covered eight key areas: (1) recognizing the effects of trauma, (2) recovery from trauma, (3) building resiliency, (4) helping kids feel safe, (5) using groups to build resiliency, (6) promoting healthy approaches to grief and loss, (7) supporting the youth worker, and (8) linking with mental health providers. The PIHPG then developed a unified approach to content presentation simultaneous to the AHC surveying relevant literature and tools, contemporary resources, published guides, and training materials that reflected practice wisdom and research. Workgroups were formed to review content developed by AHC. PASE's extensive network of experts in PYD-related technical assistance, training, youth programming, and communications facilitated recruitment of workgroup members; the AHC's expertise was in working with traumatized youth and other professionals who engage youth around high-risk issues, such as human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
The final and most complex stage of content development entailed obtaining detailed, real-life exemplars of best practices. To accomplish this, four focus groups were formed of workgroup participants and their extended networks. Each was composed of experienced youth work trainers and supervisors, program developers, and trauma service experts. The groups focused on two subject areas each: (1) defining trauma and its impact/PYD strategies for strengthening resilience; (2) making the service setting a safe space/group strategies for fostering recovery; (3) grief, loss, and endings/agency preparedness; and (4) supporting staff/linking with mental health services. Each focus group meeting was taped and transcribed, and in-depth, follow-up interviews were conducted to clarify and expand content. The groups focused on questions such as the following:
• How should youth workers be trained to recognize manifestations of trauma? 
Another method to build capacity with youth workers to prepare for YD programming in their agencies is illustrated by the out-of-school programs developed by the PYCE in North Crown Heights, Brooklyn. In this approach, the learning environment creates informal skills-development opportunities for program consumers, young adults, and adult staff members, and internal capacity-building is supplemented by formal training and technical assistance delivered by external experts.
AmeriCorps members aged 18 to 22 years partnered with full-time, adult youth workers from social service agencies to establish out-of-school programs. The AmeriCorps members committed to a year of part-time public service in exchange for training and a small stipend, and were responsible for planning, implementing, and staffing the programs. Offerings included entrepreneurial silk-screening, drama and debate, sports tournaments, mock court, and conducting a large community survey of more than 5,000 youth each summer. The programs were designed so that the program consumers, along with the AmeriCorps members who planned and ran the programs, gained experience that would be educational and relevant to workforce participation and later habits of civic engagement and service. In this model, the distinction between youth program consumers and adult youth workers was intentionally blurred; the AmeriCorps members were given a set of opportunities and support as a means of promoting their own positive development, and in turn provided opportunities and support for children and younger teens. Thus, they were both the recipients and providers of YD interventions. This duality allowed both internal and external capacity-building to be focused on the AmeriCorps members, as well as on the full-time adult youth workers. Although both AmeriCorps members and adult agency staff provided youth work services, for the sake of clarity we will use the terms "program consumer," "AmeriCorps member," and "youth workers."
Capacity with AmeriCorps members was built and maintained by their participation in a 60-hour orientation covering topics such as history of national service, recognizing and addressing child abuse, classroom management, team-building activities, play therapy techniques, and project and lesson planning. Each AmeriCorps member had to demonstrate mastery of the material before participating in the delivery of training. Youth workers also received targeted training intended for adult agency staff.
Added to the formal internal capacity-building for youth workers described above were informal means of enhancing preparedness for YD work within programs. For example, some individuals had prior experience in the program as consumers and/or AmeriCorps members. The multiple levels of participation, as program consumer, AmeriCorps member, and/or youth worker, reflect an intentionally designed progression of involvement for young people who wished to stay active in the programs over time. Within a program that serves approximately 250 young people annually, 7 consumers became AmeriCorps members, 10 AmeriCorps members became youth workers, and 2 former AmeriCorps members became program directors over a 4-year period. Program experience gained by young people as consumers helped prepare them to assume roles as full-time agency staff. In addition, the youth workers expressed openness to learning from AmeriCorps members, both through written feedback on program activities and through adopting new practices developed by the AmeriCorps members.
AmeriCorps members and youth workers both received training and technical assistance from the AHC through its Assets Coming Together for Youth Center for Excellence, described in greater detail in the article by Riser and colleagues elsewhere in this supplement. Training sessions by AHC staff included more general topics, as well as those that were tailored to the specific needs of one youth program. For example, one training session focused on fundamental concepts of public health and survey design. Health concepts included defining a population by one or more characteristics (eg, geographic, health behaviors), types of community health (eg, physical & mental health, civic responsibility, education, economic security, physical and social environment), and prevention strategies that can be used to reduce risk for negative health outcomes. Survey concepts addressed included fundamental principles of survey design and administration, as well as the types of survey questions used. AmeriCorps members then drafted surveys that focused on five public health topics and received technical assistance from AHC staff to refine and edit the surveys. Youth program consumers, with supervision from the AmeriCorps members, collected and analyzed the survey data and produced written reports, the results of which were presented to community leaders and at a city gang awareness conference. Youth workers reported that the training helped the AmeriCorps members develop broader concepts of community health and produce more rigorous (although still nonscientific) surveys.
Other examples of external capacity building involved training sessions for both AmeriCorps members and youth workers to prepare them to evaluate the programs that they ran. Training began with the concepts of developmental assets and positive developmental settings, and then covered components of a logic model and of a consumer satisfaction survey. 26 In the first session, AmeriCorps members created logic models of the programs they ran. In the second session, they learned the principles of designing program participant surveys and created sample survey items that could assess consumer satisfaction and examine program elements identified in the logic models. AmeriCorps members demonstrated mastery of the concepts by drafting logic models of their programs, editing them with feedback from AHC staff, constructing a consumer satisfaction survey and key elements of their logic models (eg, are they reaching their target population, is the program space safe, clean, and attractive, do participants like the activities). Although this training was initially developed for the AmeriCorps members, youth workers requested it for themselves after they observed the AmeriCorps members produce and use logic models for their programs. Sometimes intimidating for adults with experience in program development, logic modeling was quickly grasped by AmeriCorps members who became fluent in using the framework. The program logic models guided the development of program participant surveys and the logic model terminology became a common language that was adopted by the adult staff.
• Results/Discussion
Many mental health professionals who interact with young people are not aware of their adolescent clients' exposure to community violence, fail to ask about such exposure, 27 and fail to ask about the risk of exposure. 28, 29 Preliminary findings from the evaluation of PIH show that all of the 31 participating agencies reported that trauma is now part of their everyday focus. As a result, they are handling it more effectively and the youth they serve have improved access to mental health services. They reported an increased collaboration among youth workers to address the needs of traumatized youth, rather than removing them from program activities when they react with behavioral problems, as occurred previously. Overall, youth workers reported an increased acceptance of a role for mental health service providers and mental health discussions in the setting of a youth service program. In addition, PIH had significant unanticipated impacts, such as the establishment of, or improvement in, systems for tracking all youth across programs within each agency, including those with and without mental health needs. The PIH initiative demonstrates that a broad-based partnership can bring tremendous and widely varying expertise at the community level to improve the performance of individual youth workers, program directors, and programs. As a result of collaborating with the AHC, the PIH partners came to recognize that they and health and human service sectors with which they had rarely, if ever, interacted were now identifying common goals. With capacity building as the primary objective, the focus on adults in community settings was a logical point of intervention. Thus, although YD was not an immediate goal of this project, increasing the knowledge and competence of staff and administrators in youth serving agencies is a necessary first step in preparing organizations to be ready for YD programming. The absence of youth representation in program development, and of a data-collection process on the youth impact at the agency level, indicates areas for improvement in future efforts that will move toward the ideal goals of PY articulated by Schulman elsewhere in this supplement. However, enhancing organizational readiness is often the first step in preparing for YD programming.
The PYCE initiative was characterized by the richness of the learning environment that emerged and the fact that youth program consumers, AmeriCorps members, and youth workers all learned from one another. A 2-month follow-up by AHC staff demonstrated that some of the practices developed in the training were being used. For example, the logic model had been adopted, which the adult staff would have been unlikely to embrace in the absence of the strongly favorable reaction from the AmeriCorps members. In addition, both AmeriCorps members and youth workers had adopted the language of the logic model and logic modeling had become the primary method for program development. Evaluation and participant feedback had been incorporated into everyday practice and was now the norm.
•
Whereas the PIH initiative took a top-down approach with expert trainers working with adult staff only, the PYCE initiative employed a youth-adult partnership model characterized by youth and adults receiving training together and working collaboratively on program planning, program development, and program evaluation. While the latter example incorporated the PYD practice of involving young people directly in its implementation, the former initiative also has a significant implication for PYD. It demonstrated that PYD, which emphasizes a strengths-based approach in which youth are actively involved throughout program development, can benefit directly by having adults in youth service programs focus on the very real problems with which many youth struggle. While addressing social pathologies, the PIH initiative leveraged PYD principles by building on the capacity and strengths of youth workers and youth services. Although the two exemplars presented here are remarkably different in their scope and aims, together they demonstrate that partnerships can drive systems for improving competencies in youth workers and the capacities of youth services. Moreover, they each relied on the staff of an urban AHC, an entity often not considered as a partner in youth service sectors. These staff provided training and technical assistance to build capacity, demonstrating that healthcare service providers can have an important role in the public health practice of PYD.
Cell phones are a necessity in modern society. Moreover, modern smartphones are subject to customization. Smartphones allow users to easily utilize information from websites. Through participation in social networking services, important relationships can be formed 1) . As smartphone functions become more varied and complex, the number of available screen sizes has increased. Studies on the functionality and usability of smartphones [1] [2] [3] and their effects on the body 4, 5) have been conducted to address these trends.
Many people use only one hand to operate their smartphones 6) . Three scenarios that require users to operate smartphones with one-hand have been identified by Jeon 7) ; namely, when they are carrying baggage in one hand, when they are walking, and when they cannot use two hands owing to a physical disability.
Most stroke patients are afflicted with hemiparalysis; as a result, regardless of whether it is pre-dominant hand or not, these patients must only use one hand. The functionality and usability of smartphones will be different for stroke patients than for non-disabled people. In some cases, stroke patients must change their dominant hand because the side of their predominant hand is paralyzed. The aim of this study was to investigate differences in functionality and usability among three smartphone screen sizes for stroke patients who are limited to the use of one hand, and to investigate the differences in terms of smartphone usage between the pre-dominant hand and non-dominant hand.
The patients included in this study were those who (1) had hemiplegia following a stroke, (2) were able to understand the task and express themselves, (3) had some experience in using a cell phone, and (4) provided consent to participate in the study. This research was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Inje University.
Patients excluded from the study included those suffering from tremors, involuntary movements, cognitive impairment, or visual problems. Thirteen patients with stroke participated in the study. All patients were right-hand dominant before the onset of stroke. Five participants suffered from right hemiplegia and eight suffered from left hemiplegia; thus, there were eight pre-dominant hand users and five pre-non-dominant hand users (Table 1) .
Three smartphone screen sizes-4.2, 4.5, and 5.6 inch screens-were used in this study. In a previous study 8) , these were identified as the smartphone screen sizes most often used in Korea. The smartphones in this study are listed in Table  2 . For usability testing, the prototype containing the screen sections was printed on transparencies fitted to the sizes of the smartphone screen, which were subsequently attached to the smartphones. Participants performed dragging operations along the sections, using the simplest operation among the six common input interactions 8) . The participants assessed discomfort while performing two-way drags in the sections between numbers 1-3, 5-7, 9-11, 1-9, 2-10, 3-11, 1-11 and 3-9. Data coding for left-hand users was converted to be symmetric with that of right-hand users. The discomfort was measured using a four-point Likert scale: one point indicated that the operation was extremely comfortable, two points indicated that it was easy, three points indicated discomfort, and four points indicated extreme discomfort (Fig. 1) .
For functionality, the participants quickly touched the numbers 0 through 9 in order on the keypad, and the assessor measured the completion time and number of errors. The participants performed this task three times. The average time and frequency of errors were analyzed. The tasks and the sizes of the smartphones were randomly ordered.
Data analysis was conducted using SPSS 20.0 statistical software. To test homogeneity between two groups, χ 2 and Mann-Whitney tests were conducted. To compare functionality and usability among the three sizes of smartphone screens, a Kruskal-Wallis test was conducted. If significant differences were noted among the three sizes, a Mann-Whitney test was conducted to separately compare the two sizes. The significant values in the Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney tests were set to 0.05 and 0.016, respectively. To compare the functionality and usability between dominant hand and non-dominant hand operations, Mann-Whitney tests were conducted. The significant value was set to 0.05. 
No significant differences were noted in the general characteristics of non-dominant and dominant hand users (Table 1 ). Usability differences among the three screen sizes were not found for non-dominant hand users; however, in dominant hand users, differences were found (p<0.016) among the three screen sizes for sections 3-11, 1-11, and 2-10. Usability differences between dominant and non-dominant hand users were found in three sections of the 5.6 inch screen, four sections of the 4.5 inch screen, and six sections on the 4.2 inch screen (p<0.05) ( Table 3) .
No differences in completion time were found among the three screen sizes in the non-dominant hand users; however, for dominant hand users, completion time differences were found between the operations performed on the 4.2 and 5.6inch screens and between the operations performed on the 4.5 and 5.6 inch screens (p<0.016). Among the three screen sizes, no differences in frequency errors were found in both dominant and non-dominant hand users (p>0.016). Completion time differences between non-dominant and dominant hand users were found for all screen sizes (p<0.05). Significant differences in frequency of errors between non-dominant and dominant hand users were found when 4.2 and 4.5 inch screens were used (p<0.05), but not when 5.6 inch screens were used (p>0.05) ( Table 4) .
When using a smartphone, users typically prefer using one-hand instead of both hands. The size of the smartphone is a key factor in determining whether users operate their smartphones with one hand or both hands 9) . Because of hemiparalysis, many stroke patients must use one hand to operate their smartphones. This study investigated smartphone usability and functionality for stroke patients and considered three sizes of smartphone screens and whether the patients used their predominant hand or not.
Analysis on usability among the three smartphones screen sizes for dominant hand users showed that stroke patients experienced significantly more discomfort in only three sections: 3-11, 1-11, and 2-10. These sections overlapped a portion of the screen that is difficult to tough 7) . Im 8) reported that users operating their smartphones with one hand were satisfied with all input modes when using a 3.5 inch screen, some input modes when using a 4.0, 4.5, or 5.0 inch screen, but dissatisfied with most input modes when using a 5.5 inch screen. However, the result of this study indicated that the smaller the smartphone screen, the larger the difference in usability between the dominant and non-dominant hand. It should be interpreted that the smaller the smartphone size, the more it required thumb sensitivity.
Regardless of the size of the smartphone, the completion time and usability between dominant and non-dominant hands were significantly different. It was considered that the pre-non-dominant hand user was not skillful at using a smartphone than the pre-dominant hand user. Both hands must be assessed because the performance of the dominant and non-dominant hands is different, as reported by Perry and Hourcade 10) . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to analyze smartphone functionality and usability for stroke patients while considering both the pre-dominant and pre-non-dominant hand. So, this study has a special meaning. When 4.2 and 4.5 inch screens were used, a significant difference in the frequency of errors was found between nondominant and dominant hand users, but not when 5.6 inch screens were used. This was considered because thumb movement This study has some limitations. It assessed functionality and usability while the smartphone was being held in the vertical position; horizontal position was not considered. Many variables such as flexibility of the thumb, smartphone grip patterns, and smartphone weight 6) , were not considered in this study. In the future, studies on smartphone functionality and usability of patients with stroke using only pre-non dominant hand need to be conducted. 
The molecular markers which emerge in the process after the articular cartilage injury are used in the monitoring of degenerative diseases, prognosis determination, monitoring of response to the treatment, and identification of the disease mechanism in molecular level [1, 2] . One important purpose of the measurement of molecular determinants is to examine the disease quantitatively in the early stages when the cartilage injury has not been radiologically determined yet.
Chondrocytes have a directing role in the metabolism including the construction and destruction of matrix molecules in the lifetime [3, 4] . There are simultaneous changes in tissues in the articular cartilage injury, and there is a need for molecular markers related to each tissue for the comprehensive evaluation of these changes. However, there 2 Arthritis are no official study protocols for different tissues [5] . As there can be significant differences related to biological tissues, the way of sampling of the markers which are obtained from different tissues can influence the result should be predictable. Pharmaceutical researchers have published articles on the validity of the analytical method in the determination of the method applied [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] .
Molecular markers of the cartilage are molecules which can be in the structure of protein constituting collagen, proteoglycan, and extra cellular matrix (ECM) and they show increase and decrease in several cartilage pathologies and in the different stages of the same pathology [11] .
Depending on the severity of the ongoing inflammation, cartilage-based markers in several intensities go out of the cell and enter into the synovial fluid. Parts of the cartilage ECM macromolecules which are poured into the synovial fluid can pass to the systemic circulation [12] .
This study aims to determine the biological markers, occurring in the articular cartilage injury, directly by cartilage tissue biopsies and in synovial fluid, and present the relationship between them.
This study was conducted after the decision of the meeting dated June 1, 2010, numbered 2010/04 and the permission of the Local Ethical Committee of Experimental Animals and the Use of Live Mammal of Namik Kemal University. Experimental analyses were repeated minimum 3 times. In order to minimize the differences in the technique, anaesthesia, injury formation, and analyses were performed by the same researchers.
Male wistar rats were supplied from Istanbul University Experimental Medicine Research Institute. Ketamine HCl (Ketalar 500 mg) injectable 1 flacon Pfizer and xylazine (Rompun 2%) injectable solution, Parke-Davis, were used. Protein extraction solution (78510) and protease inhibitor cocktail (87785) Thermo Scientific Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL & 1105, were supplied from the United States of America. NO kit was supplied from ELISA commercial kits, IL-TIMP-1 (BMS2018/BMS2018TEN) was supplied from Cayman Chemical, matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) (BMS2016/2CE) and MMP-13 (BMS2022/BMS2022TEN) platinum were supplied from ELISA eBioscience, and TNF-(KRC3011) kit was supplied from Invitrogen. Mechanical disruption was provided with EpiSonic Multi-Functional Bioprocessor 1100. Mindray MR 96 A, Chinese brand device, was used as Enzyme L nked-Immuno-Sorbent Assay (ELISA) microplate reader. The tissues which are obtained from 144 wistar rats were studied double-blind by the same researchers.
One hundred forty-four male wistar rats with an average weight of 300 grams were divided into 2 groups. Synovial fluid samples were taken from all of the rats. While taking synovial fluid, the knee joint was entered by the injector and the liquid which is given into the joint was withdrawn 45 seconds later and taken into the tubes containing EDTA. Synovial fluid aspirates with PBS in the rate of 75 L 1 : 3 were centrifuged at 24 ∘ C in 3000 Revolutions Per Minute (rpm) for 15 minutes and cleared of cells and maintained at minus 40 ∘ C to be evaluated with ELISA. All of the samples were taken at 05.00 in the morning.
The rats in group I (control group, = 36) were applied arthrotomy under ketamine HCI and xylazine anaesthesia. Cartilage tissue samples were taken from distal femur medial condyles. These samples were taken as reference values for enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and histopathological evaluations. And then, these rats were sacrificed.
The rats in group II ( = 108) were applied arthrotomy under ketamine HCl and xylazine anaesthesia, and a complete layer of cartilage injury was formed in their medial femoral condyles ( Figure 1 ) [13, 14] . From the right knees of the rats where injury was formed, synovial fluid samples were taken by the same technique on the 15th day. Then, arthrotomy was applied and cartilage tissue samples were taken from their distal medial condyles. These rats were sacrificed after this operation.
The synovial lavage fluid and cartilage tissue samples taken from the experimental and control groups were analysed by direct or indirect methodologies by MMP-9, MMP-13, NO, TIMP-1, TNF-, and commercial ELISA kits which are cartilage injury molecular markers in line with company bulletins.
The samples were blindly studied. The synovial fluid tissue samples which were taken from the experimental and control groups were analysed by MMP-9, MMP-13, NO, TIMP-1, and TNF-values ELISA kits and in line with the company bulletins.
Before conducting analyses in the cartilage tissue, the tissues were made compatible for kit study procedure. Porcelain mortar and pestle were subjected to 8% sodium hypochlorite solution. They were dried after having been washed with bidistillated water. They were wrapped with aluminium folios and kept in the drying oven at 134 ∘ C for 1 hour. At the end of this time, they were kept at −20 ∘ C for 30 minutes. The cartilage tissue samples which were broken up with and pulverized by a pestle in the presence of liquid nitrogen were taken into cryo tubes and coded (Figure 2 ). They were weighed at the rate of 1 : 20 (w/v) and transferred into eppendorf tubes by means of 15 no scalpel end. Primarily 400 L lysisbuffer was added on them. Then, a protease cocktail inhibitor ten times the ready volume (making 1x the last concentration) is added and vortexed for 1 minute, and centrifuging process was performed at +4 ∘ C for 5 minutes in 10.000 (g) [15, 16] . The samples were kept at −80 ∘ C for one night. For the mechanical disruption of the cartilage tissue; they were subjected to 2 times vibration and ultrasonic sound waves operation for 10 minutes under the same pressure at intervals of 20 minutes in sonicator by watering down with phosphate buffer saline (PBS; pH = 7, 4) in 1.5 mL microtubes (max 400 L of sample content). And then, in line with the company bulletins, the samples were placed in the wells. MMP-9, MMP-13, TIMP-1 and TNF-450 nm, NO was evaluated by reading at ELISA microplate reader at 540 nm wave length as a result of the calculation of the data which was obtained over the nitrate and nitrite values. Standards were studies as pairs.
In order to prove the cartilage complete layer injury, the cartilage tissue samples which were taken from each of 6 rats from both groups were also evaluated histopathologically. The samples were buried in paraffin-embedded blocks after the routine tissue monitoring. Five-micron sections were put to hematoxylineosin staining and examined in the light microscope (×100). Histological sections were examined in terms of 8 parameters and scored and evaluated [17] .
The data was evaluated by using SPSS 18.0 Package program. Descriptive statistics were calculated (mean, standard deviation) after performing data control. Students t-test, which is a test in the comparison of the quantitative data in the comparative analyses between the experimental and control groups, in which the measurement variables between two groups are compared, was applied. Partial correlation analysis was performed in order to explain the relationship between these mediators. Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curves were used in the determination of diagnostic sufficiency from the tissue.

The formation of the cartilage complete layer injury was reported (Figure 3 ).
All of the evaluations were evaluated in 95% confidence interval and bilaterally. Alpha meaningfulness level was determined as ≤0.05; according to the specific activity results in synovial lavage fluid and cartilage tissue of the mediators (MMP-9, MMP-13, NO, TIMP-1, and TNF-) emerging after complete layer articular cartilage injury.
No meaningful difference was determined in statistical terms between the TIMP-1 ( = 0.67) and MMP-9 ( = 0.28) levels in synovial lavage fluid and cartilage tissue. A meaningful difference was found in statistical terms between the MMP-13 ( < 0.0001), TNF-( < 0.0001), and NO ( < 0.0001) levels (Table 1) .
It was determined that the measurements in intragroup and intergroup TIMP-1 and MMP-9 mediators were variable, and close measurements were obtained in NO, TIMP-1, and TNF-variables (Figure 4 ).
In the partial correlation analysis performed, a negative linear meaningful relationship was found between TIMP-1 and MMP-13 ( < 0.0001, = −0.38); a positive meaningful relationship was found between TIMP-1 and TNF-( < 0.0001, = 0.33). A negative meaningful relationship was found between TIMP-1 and NO ( = 0.001, = −0.26). And a positive linear meaningful relationship was found between MMP-9 and TNF-( < 0.0001, = 0.34) and NO ( < 0.0001, = 0.46) ( Table 2) .
When the area under ROC curve of TIMP-1, MMP-9, MMP-13, NO, and TNF-markers and P values were examined in the study groups, MMP-13 ( < 0.0001, 95% CI: 0.70-0.85), NO ( < 0.0001, 95% CI: 0.72-0.86), and TNF-( < 0.0001, 95% CI: 0.91-0.98), results were found to be statistically meaningful ( Figure 5 ).
Osteoartrit (OA) is a disease which emerges with the breakup of the balance between the construction and destruction of the cartilage in favour of destruction, results in the loss of the cartilage, and progresses slowly [18] . Recently, it has been shown that the MMPs whose levels in the joint at the time of injury increase play an important role in the destruction of the cartilage tissue [19] . One of the tissue inhibitors which enable the balancing of these enzymes which are destructive for the cartilage is identified as metalloproteinase [20] . Particularly, the metalloproteinase which increases in OA is produced by chondrocyte and synovial cells. Since the number of these cells is higher than that in the cartilage tissue, the main production source of MMP in the joint fluid is synovial tissue. It is shown that metalloproteinase and TIMP increased in the synovial fluid in OA and collagenase-TIMP-1 complex level generally stayed under the level which can be determined by immunoassay [21] . Lohmander et al. determined that metalloproteinase and TIMP levels stayed high for a long time in the knee joint after a traumatic injury [22] . In our study, it was seen that MMP-9 levels did not change even when different methodologies are used in synovial lavage fluid and cartilage tissue analyses in the samples which were examined after the formation of injury. Likewise, no change was determined in TIMP-1 levels ( Table 1) .
The role of proinflammatory was shown in the articular cartilage injury of TNF-which are among the cytokines other than those aforementioned molecules [23, 24] . Serum TNF-level is seen as a criterion of the synovial cell hyperactivity which becomes evident in the late stages of the cartilage injury [25] . It is known that TNF-in the joint with OA mainly originates from the cells in the cartilage tissue, and these cells perform more cytokine expression when compared to synovial cells [26] .
In our study, statistically meaningful differences were determined in terms of TNF-and MMP-13 levels in the samples which were obtained from synovial lavage fluid and cartilage tissue (Table 1 ). In the subsequent partial correlation analysis, a negative meaningful relationship was found between TIMP-1 and MMP-13 ( < 0.0001, = −0.38), and a positive meaningful relationship was found between TIMP-1 and TNF-( < 0.0001, = 0.33). A positive linear meaningful relationship was found between MMP-9 and TNF-( < 0.0001, = 0.34) ( Table 2) . It was seen in ROC analysis that these two mediators can also be used in different methodologies in synovial lavage fluid and Arthritis 5 cartilage tissue. The molecular marker level results which are obtained from different areas in the literature and set forth with different methodologies are also in conformity with the data of our study [25] [26] [27] .
In an experimental study, it was it shown that NO synthesis are stimulated by several cytokines such as TNF- [28] . Evidences regarding the fact that NO is a secondary fundamental mediator after TNF-in cartilage cells were set forth in the same study [28] . In our study, on the other hand, NO level was determined to be meaningfully high in the analysis results of the samples taken from synovial lavage fluid in conformity with the TNF-level in the experimental groups. A positive linear relationship was found between TNF-and NO ( < 0.0001, = 0.46). In the ROC analysis, the fact that these mediators which were taken from different places and examined can also be analysed over a different methodology cartilage tissue was confirmed.
The affect of MMP enzymes on cartilage is inhibited by TIMP [29, 30] . NO is overexpressed at synovial tissue of injured cartilage by the stimulus of inducible nitric oxide synthase and TNF- [29] [30] [31] [32] . IL-1 and TNF-release is increased with the affect of degraded matrix molecules and so NO expression is also increased. It is reported that MMP-13 is discharged mostly via sinovial fluid [33] . We think that these data explain why TNF-, MMP-13, and NO were found more in synovial fluids in our results.
We think the restriction of our study is that it cannot be crosschecked by a method other than ELISA method which is used in the analysis of the samples.
When, among the molecular markers which are analyzed in the synovial lavage fluid, MMP-9, MMP-13, NO, TIMP-1 and TNF-, the area under the ROC curve and P values are evaluated, MMP-13 ( < 0.0001, 95% CI: 0.70-0.85), NO ( < 0.0001, 95% CI: 0.72-0.86), and TNF-( < 0.0001, 95% CI: 0.91-0.98) results are statistically significant. As a result, as it can be analyzed from the synovial lavage fluid of the molecular injury markers such as MMP-9, MMP-13, NO, TIMP-1, and TNF-which emerge in the articular cartilage injury, we can say that it can also be analyzed in a reliable manner by the indirect ELISA method described by us in the samples which are obtained from the cartilage tissue.
Calcium-dependent potassium (K Ca ) channels are known to form complexes with voltage-gated calcium (Ca 2+ ) sources. These interactions are important in linking the voltage-dependent and temporal properties of Ca 2+ influx to K Ca channel activation, allowing the K Ca channel to respond rapidly and effectively to Ca 2+ channel activity. Big conductance K Ca (KCa1.1) channels are both voltage-and Ca 2+ -dependent and were known to complex with high voltage-activated (HVA) Ca 2+ channels. [1] [2] [3] Recently, we showed that KCa1.1 channels also form a physical complex with low voltage-activated (LVA) Cav3 T-type Ca 2+ channels, as shown through coimmunoprecipitation. 4 Interaction with Cav3 Ca 2+ channels was shown to allow KCa1.1 channels to be activated at voltages as low as -70 mV, 30-40 mV lower than the activation threshold seen for KCa1.1-Cav2.1 complexes. 1 This lowvoltage KCa1.1 activity, which extended into the subthreshold region, was seen in both a heterologous expression system and neurons of the medial vestibular nucleus (MVN). 4 While determining the properties of the KCa1.1-Cav3. 2 
The KCa1.1-Cav complexes were modeled using systems of differential equations describing the activation and inactivation of the included ion channels, as well as diffusion of Ca 2+ from the Ca 2+ source. ), a n,n+1 is the surface area between the adjacent compartments, v i is the volume of the first compartment, δ n,n+1 is the distance between compartments, and the term in the brackets represents the concentration gradient. The radius of the smallest compartment was 20 nm and the radius of each consecutive compartment was increased by 20 nm. The KCa1.1 channel was placed in a compartment n and its activation calculated based on [Ca 2+ ] n , as described below. Therefore, the effect of Ca 2+ on KCa1.1 channels could be observed for distances of up to 200 nm from the Ca 2+ source by changing the compartment in which the KCa1.1 channel was located.
Large 
The distance between HVA Cav channels and KCa1.1 channels required to generate KCa1.1 activation and effects of Ca 2+ chelators has been solved analytically in previous studies. 5, 15 Here, we were interested in modeling the effects of varying the interchannel distance between either HVA (Cav2.2) or LVA (Cav3.2) Ca 2+ channels and KCa1.1 channels. In this way, we could determine how the properties of a Ca 2+ source affect the voltage-dependence and temporal properties of KCa1.1 channel activation. The Cav-mediated Ca 2+ source was modeled using 10 hemispherical compartments of increasing radii (20-200 nm; Fig. 1 ) and KCa1.1 channel activation was calculated based on [Ca 2+ ] i in a compartment. While this model did not include Ca 2+ buffers, it provides an estimation of the minimum distances and number of channels required to produce KCa1.1 activation. The parameters for Cav2.2 channels were drawn from the studies of references 8, 9, and 11, and Cav3.2 channels from experiments (data not shown) and reference 10, and KCa1.1 channels from references 6 and 7.
We first compared the activation properties of KCa1.1 by a single Cav3.2 or Cav2.2 channel as a Ca 2+ source at a fixed distance of 20 nm, which would correspond to direct juxtaposition of a Cav and KCa1.1 channel. Cav3.2 channels have a small single channel conductance (1.7 pS) and exhibit rapid and complete inactivation. 6, 8 At a distance of 20 nm from KCa1.1 in the model, a single Cav3.2 channel only caused a slight increase in the open probability (P o ) of the KCa1.1 channel, reaching just 0.06 of maximal conductance ( Fig. 2A , right, dark blue). Cav2.2 channels have a much higher single channel conductance, maximal P o , and inactivate slowly. 5, 6, 10, 12 A single Cav2.2 channel at 20 nm distance from a KCa1.1 channel was thus able to increase the KCa1.1 P o to 0.14, or twice that of a single Cav3.2 channel (Fig. 2A, left) .
It has been proposed that multiple Cav channels may complex with KCa1.1 channels, as much as 1 Cav channel per KCa1.1 α-subunit. 1 We also hypothesized that multiple Cav3.2 channels may cooperate to activate KCa1.1 channels. with the KCa1.1 channel at 20 nm (KCa1.1-Cav2.2[4´; 20 nm]) reached a maximum of 0.69. However, multiple Cav3.2 channels generated significant KCa1.1 activation at voltages as low as -50 mV ( Fig. 2A, left) . KCa1.1-Cav2.2 complexes, on the other hand, only showed activation for voltages positive to -30 mV ( Fig. 2A, right) .
Overall, these results show that the higher single channel conductance of a Cav2.2 channel allows a single channel to be much more effective at activating a nearby KCa1.1 channel than does a Cav3 channel. In fact, multiple Cav3 Ca 2+ channels are required to provide significant activation of KCa1.1 channels. The voltage-dependence of the Ca 2+ channel is also reflected in KCa1.1 activation, such that Cav3 channels are capable at activating KCa1.1 channels from lower voltage than Cav2.2 channels.
The distance between the KCa1.1 channel and its Ca 2+ source is an important factor determining KCa1.1 activation. 1, 5, [16] [17] [18] [19] Therefore, we tested the effects of increasing the distance between Cav and KCa1.1 channels. At a distance of 40 nm (within a nanodomain), both the KCa1.1-Cav3.2 and KCa1.1-Cav2.2 models showed much weaker activation of KCa1.1 than for a 20 nm separation (Fig. 2B and C) . The KCa1.1-Cav3.2(4´; 40 nm) complex reached a peak of only 0.12, or 23% of the maximal activation of the KCa1.1-Cav3.2(4´; 20 nm) complex (Fig. 2B and C, left) . Likewise, the KCa1.1-Cav2.2(4´; 40 nm) complex reached a maximum of 0.24 compared with 0.69 at 20 nm separation ( Fig. 2B and C, right) . Therefore, Ca 2+ -dependent activation of a KCa1.1-Cav complex depends strongly on interchannel distance and is sensitive to even small differences in separation, with the largest effect on Cav3 as compared with Cav2.2 containing complexes (Fig. 2C) .
Cav3.2 and Cav2.2 channels differ significantly in their kinetic properties. Cav3.2 channels show fast activation and a short time constant of inactivation while Cav2.2 channels show inactivation, but to a lesser extent and over a greater timeframe. A series of voltage steps provided to the KCa1.1-Cav3.2(4´; 20 nm) model revealed a KCa1.1 channel current that also showed fast activation followed by rapid inactivation within 100 ms. This is important in confirming that the properties of the Cav3 channel were conferred to the KCa1.1 channel (Fig. 3A) , as found in MVN neuron and tsA-210 cell recordings. 4 On the other hand, the KCa1.1-Cav2.2(1´; 20 nm) model showed slower inactivation of K + current with significant activation still observed after 300 ms (Fig. 3B) . As previously reported, no significant activation was detected below -30 mV for the KCa1.1-Cav2.2(1´; 20 nm) complex, again confirming direct recordings. 15 Increasing the number of Cav2.2 channels resulted in a slowing of inactivation for the KCa1.1-Cav2.2 complex, which was not seen for an increased number of Cav3.2 channels (Fig. 3C) . This is due to the larger conductance of Cav2.2 channels and build-up of [Ca 2+ ] i with a large number of Cav2.2 channels. 
The results shown in Rehak et 
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.
Members of the atheriniform family Phallostethidae (sensu Parenti & Louie, 1998) are small and slender, nearly transparent surface-swimming fishes, known from Southeast Asian waters. Male phallostethids have a unique complex copulatory organ, termed the priapium, under the throat (thus the fishes of this family are commonly called "priapiumfish"). The priapium is a bilaterally asymmetric organ for holding or clasping onto females and fertilizing their eggs internally; following internal fertilization, phallostethid females do not give birth to live young, but instead lay fertilized eggs (Parenti, 1989; Grier & Parenti, 1994; Parenti, 2005) . The family comprises 21 species, in addition to the new species described here, classified in four genera [Parenti, 1989 [Parenti, , 1996 Parenti & Louie, 1998; Nelson, 2006 (as Phallostethinae) ]: Gulaphallus Herre, 1925 (5 species); Neostethus Regan, 1916 (11 species) ; Phallostethus Regan, 1913 (2 species); Phenacostethus Myers, 1928 (3 species) .
The phallostethid fauna in the Mekong basin has not been well studied. In his checklist of inland fishes of the Indochina and adjacent areas (including Malay Peninsula), Kottelat (1989) confirmed the records of following six phallostethids from the region: Ceratostethus bicornis (Regan, 1916) Regan, 1916 ; Neostethus siamensis Myers, 1937 (a junior synonym of Neostethus lankesteri); Phallostethus dunckeri Regan, 1913; Phenacostethus posthon Roberts, 1971 ; Phenacostethus smithi Myers, 1928 . Kottelat (1989 recognized all of these euryhaline species, but he did not record any species directly from the Mekong. Rainboth (1996: 171) recorded Phenacostethus smithi from the Cambodian Mekong, with a comment "1 or 2 species found in the Cambodian Mekong" for the genus. He also noted that the other species of the family had been taken from the Mekong delta, although he did not list the names.
During our recent field surveys of the fish-fauna in the Vietnamese Mekong, at least four species of phallostethid fishes were collected. Three of them are identified as Phenacostethus smithi, Neostethus bicornis and N. lankesteri. The first was locally abundant in the slow-flowing tidal canals (but easily overlooked because of its small size, up to 15.6 mm SL), whereas the other two species were common in the intertidal areas of mangrove forests and adjacent brackish-water creeks. The fourth species was frequently collected with P. smithi and/or N. lankesteri but, compared with these two, it was relatively uncommon. The species lacks a first dorsal fin, and has long rod-like toxactinium and long-based anal fin with 24-27 rays (Figs. 1-4); these characters indicate that it is unambiguously a Phallostethus of the phallostethid subfamily Phallostethinae (sensu Parenti, 1989) .
Phallostethus was hitherto known only from two allopatric species: P. dunckeri (type species of the genus, Johor, Malaysia) and P. lehi Parenti, 1996 (northwestern Borneo) . The Mekong species, described here as new, differs from these two described congeners in number of caudal vertebrae, teeth on paradentary and serrae on second ctenactinium.
The examined specimens are deposited in the fish collection of the Can Tho University, Can Tho (CTU), National Museum of Nature and Science, Tokyo (NSMT), Division of Fishes, National Museum of Natural History, Washington D.C. (USNM), and Zoological Reference Collection, Department of Life Science, Faculty of Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore (ZRC). Measurements were made point-to-point with calipers under dissecting microscopes to the nearest 0.01 mm (but rounded to a tenth of a millimeter in the descriptions here). The methods for measurements and counts follow Hubbs & Lagler (1958) , with exceptions given below (the snout tip refers to the mid-anteriormost point of the upper lip): interorbital width was the least width of bony interorbital space; jaw length was measured between the snout tip and the posteriormost point of lip; body depth was measured in 2 ways, the first is the maximum depth (not including the membranous abdominal keel), and the second was taken at the anal-fin origin; preanal length was measured from snout tip to origin of anal fin; pectoral-and caudalfin lengths were measured from the base to the tip of the longest ray in respective fins; transverse scales were counted from dorsal-fin origin downward and forward to anal-fin base; predorsal scales were divided into two parts in the new species by a small naked space behind the occipital region, and here represented as "scales along predorsal midline on occipital region" + "scales along predorsal midline behind naked space"; circumpeduncular scale count was the number of scales along a zigzag vertical line through the narrowest point of caudal peduncle. All fish lengths given are standard length (SL). Fin-ray counts include all rudiments, except as follows: uppermost pectoral-fin ray was a nubby ossicle (confirmed on cleared and stained specimens), and not counted; last two rays of dorsal and anal fins were supported by a single pterygiophore, and counted as one ray in each fin. Scales (except for predorsal and circumpeduncular scales) and paired fin rays were counted on both sides, but gill rakers were counted on the right-side only. Scales and details of the head were observed on a specimen stained with cyanine blue. Osteological features were observed from radiographs (for all specimens) and two cleared and stained specimens following the method of Potthoff (1984) . Osteological descriptions and frequency of dominance (sinistral/ dextral) follow Parenti (1984 Parenti ( , 1989 and Parenti (1996) , respectively. Vinh Province, Vietnam (9°57.1' N, 106°1.8' E), 0.5-3.5 m depths, 28 May 2010, collected by L.X. Tran; USNM 404479, 1 specimen (male, cleared and stained), 24.5 mm SL, collected with CTU-P 5020. 

Phallostethus cuulong is distinguished from congeners in having following characters: seven serrae on the second ctenactinium in adult males (vs. five and eight in P. dunckeri and P. lehi, respectively); 11-13 pectoral-fin rays (vs. 9-10 and 12 in P. dunckeri and P. lehi, respectively); 11-14+25-26=37-40 vertebrae (vs. 13+27=40 and 12+28=40 in P. dunckeri and P. lehi); approximately 5-19 teeth on paradentary (vs. 15-20 and 28 or more in P. dunckeri and P. lehi, respectively). All six examined males are dextral (vs. one and two known males of P. dunckeri are sinistral and dextral respectively, and all four know males of P. lehi are sinistral).
Description. Counts of the holotype are asterisked, and the frequency of each count is given in parentheses following the relevant count. Dorsal-fin rays 7 (2), 8* (6) or 9 (1); anal-fin rays 24* (4), 25 (1), 26 (3) or 27 (1); pectoral-fin rays 11 (2), 12* (7) or 13* (9); scales in lateral series 34 (5), 35* (10) or 36 (3); predorsal scales 1+25 (1), 2+25 (1), 2+26 (4) or 2+27* (3); transverse scales 6 (3), 7* (12) or 8* (3); circumpeduncular scales 12* (8) or 13 (1); paradentary teeth approximately 5 (1), 6 (3), 7 (3), 8 (3), 10 (1), 13* (1), 14 (2), 15* (1), 18 (2) or 19 (1).
The following measurements are % of SL: head length 22.1-24.1; snout length 7.0-8.5; eye diameter 6.7-7.3; interorbital width 3.3-5.2; length of jaw 8.0-9.4; predorsal length 78.0-82.6; preanal length 46.4-48.7; maximum body depth 15.0-18.7; body depth at anal-fin origin 12.4-15.0; body width 9.4-14.0; caudal-peduncle length 18.6-20.7; caudal-peduncle depth 5.6-7.6; length of dorsal-fin base 9.1-10.5; length of anal-fin base 32.3-36.7; pectoral-fin length 14.6-19.1; caudal-fin length 20.1-22.4.
Head depressed anteriorly, with flat or barely concave interorbital space. Dorsal surface of head with membranous dome when alive or freshly collected (which can be seen in the cleared and stained specimens, e.g., Fig. 4 ), but shrunken and not apparent in alcohol specimen. Snout rather pointed. Eyes lateral on head, large, diameter slightly less than snout length. Mouth terminal or subterminal; jaws small, barely extend to a level of anterior margin of eye; upper jaws highly protractile. Body compressed, moderately deep. Anus and urogenital openings anterior, ventral to pectoral-fin base. A slightly frayed, fleshy membranous mid-ventral keel between urogenital opening and anal-fin origin. In males, a distinct mid-ventral groove, deepened and widened anteriorly, supports the priapium and mid-ventral keel. Pectoral fin falcate, the uppermost branched ray longest in most specimens; pectoral-fin rays branched, except for the uppermost 1 (uppermost nubby ossicle not included here; see "Materials and Methods" above) and lowermost 1-2 rays unbranched. Pelvic fin absent in males, present but rudimentary in females (Fig. 3) . First dorsal fin absent; origin of second dorsal fin at, or slightly before, a level of posterior end of anal-fin base; anterior 2-3 rays simple, whereas the other rays branched. Anal fin with a long base, commencing well before midlength; anterior 2-4 rays simple, whereas the other rays branched. Caudal fin emarginate, symmetrical dorsoventrally.
Male bilaterally asymmetric, dextral; namely, seminal papilla offset to right side of body (= aproctal side), and anus offset to left side of body (= proctal side); a long rod-like toxactinium curved from left to right; a large fleshy pad, the pulvinulus, covers articulation point of toxactinium and aproctal axial bone (Fig. 3) .
Scales on body cycloid, moderately large and deciduous; scales on abdomen largest; body entirely scaled, except for pectoral-fin base, mid-ventral groove before anal-fin origin, and mid-predorsal narrow naked space slightly behind occipital region; head and fins naked, except for posterior part of occipital region and basal part of caudal fin with some scales.
Teeth on premaxilla and dentary unicuspid, slightly curved inward. Paradentary slender (as in Phallostethus dunckeri illustrated by Parenti, 1984: 4, fig. 1 ), with 5-19 minute teeth laterally; teeth on paradentary form a uniserial row or, in some larger specimens, biserial rows; teeth on inner row, if present, much smaller than those on outer row.
Cephalic sensory canals reduced, comprising: two short infraorbital canals (each with terminal pores only) anteriorly and anteroventrally to eye; preopercular canal (with 6-7 pores).
Main external bones in males including a long, curved toxactinium and a short stout ctenactinium with seven serrae dorsally (not including a hook-like distal tip); two smallest males examined (CTU-P 2493 and USNM 404478, 20.0-20.3 mm SL) bearing 5-6 serrae on ctenactinium, assumued to represent the immature condition (and not included in the diagnosis, above). First pleural rib attached to fifth vertebra in males, fourth in females; first pleural rib in female much shorter than in male. Branchiostegal rays 4.
Color when alive or freshly collected. Body subtranslucent in life, but whitish immediately after death (Fig.  1) ; a bright white blotch over brain when alive (assumed to fade just after death); iris silvery; minute melanophores scattered on snout, cheek and jaws; a melanophore at angle of lower jaw; a large reddish yellow blotch, slightly smaller than eye, at mid-lateral caudal fin base; male priapium with several large and small melanophores, particularly on the aproctal side (= right side in the new species) just anterior to the base of second ctenactinium; a series of minute black dots along mid-lateral septum of body musculature at least on caudal part of body; inner side of pectoral fin with many melanophores at least dorsally (the area with melanophores much more broader in females than in males); a series of mid-ventral black dots from anal-fin origin to caudal-fin base; other fins transparent.
Color in alcohol. Head and body pale straw-colored; a series of irregular-sized melanophores (several of them dash-like) along midlateral septum of body musculature (at least on caudal part); paired patches of melanophores on anterior part of snout dorsally; many melanophores scattered on head above neurocranium, those posterior distinctly larger than those anterior; a melanophore at angle of lower jaw; a patch of minute gular melanophores; two patches of melanophores at throat and just behind urogenital opening in females; male priapium with several large and small melanophores, particularly on the aproctal side (= right side in this species) just anterior to the base of second ctenactinium; a mid-ventral series of black dots from anal-to caudal-fin bases, each along anal-fin base on interspace between fin rays (continuous and forming a irregular blackish gray line in some specimens); inner side of pectoral fin with many melanophores dorsally (the area with melanophores much broader in females than in males); caudal fin covered by numerous minute melanophores; other fins transparent.
Distribution, habitat and the other notes. Phallostethus cuulong is known from nine specimens, six males and three females, collected from shallow waters (< 1.2m depth) around banks of slow-flowing turbid canals and rivers with soft muddy bottoms in Soc Trang and Tra Vinh Provinces, Vietnam.
The first author (KS) observed that a fish, latter designated as one of the paratypes of Phallostethus cuulong (NSMT-P 106665), swam slowly at the water surface around a bank of the slow-flowing tidal canal with dense semi-aquatic vegetation. A bright white blotch on dorsal surface of head was clearly confirmed in the field, but less vivid than that of the sympatric aplocheilid, Aplocheilus panchax (well-known for its reflective "pineal" spot on the top of the head). When the fish was disturbed, it quickly swam a short distance away from the original position; it was subsequently scooped up carefully using a hand net by KS. The species was usually solitary, and collected by hand nets or seine nets.
Like the other phallostethids in the Vietnamese Mekong, this species has never been seen in the fish markets. As far as we aware, all fishes of the family Phallostethidae have no vernacular names in the Vietnamese Mekong (except for the new species herein named), since they are usually overlooked.
Etymology. The specific name, cuulong, is the Vietnamese name of the Mekong delta (Cưu Long), where the type series of the new species was collected. The name, here applied as a noun in apposition, means "nine dragons," in reference to nine distributaries of the Mekong basin in Vietnam.
Remarks. Following the key to genera of phallostethid fishes by Parenti (1989) , the new species is clearly assigned to Phallostethus by having the combination of, e.g., shield-like pulvinulus, large seminal papilla, long toxactinium, membranous dome on dorsal surface of head, 24-27 anal-fin rays, 37-40 vertebrae, serrated ctenactinium, non-projecting lower jaw beyond upper jaw, no first dorsal fin, and 7-9 second dorsal-fin rays. In particular, no other phallostethid genera are known that bear 24 or more anal-fin rays (vs. 22 or less anal-fin rays in the other phallostethids). Within the genus, the new species resembles the Bornean species Phallostethus lehi in sharing 11-13 pectoral-fin rays, but differs in having seven serrae on second ctenactinium in adult (vs. eight in P. lehi), 25-26 caudal vertebrae (vs. 28), and 6-19 paradentary teeth (vs. 28 or more). All six examined males of the new species are dextral, immediately distinguishing them from sinistral males in P. lehi. The new species is also distinguished from Phallostethus dunckeri, known only from Johor, Malay Peninsula but presumed to be extinct (Parenti, 1996) , by having seven serrae on second ctenactinium in adults (vs. five in P. dunckeri), 11-13 pectoral-fin rays (vs. 9-10), and 25-26 caudal vertebrae (vs. 27).
Sexual dimorphism in the pleural ribs was reported from Phallostethus lehi by Parenti (1996) ; according to her, the species has the first pair of pleural ribs on the fifth vertebrae in males, the fourth vertebrae in females. This dimorphism is also found in Phallostethus cuulong. Furthermore, P. cuulong appears to show sexual dimorphism in the number of precaudal vertebrae: all six males examined have 13-14 precaudal vertebrae, as against 11-12 in all three females examined. Although Parenti & Louie (1998) reported similar sexual dimorphism in vertebral counts from four species of Neostethus, hitherto it has never been known from the other species of Phallostethus.
Plastic surgeons have experienced a surge in the frequency of body contouring surgical procedures, including brachioplasty, abdominoplasty, mastopexy, upper and lower backlift, and thighlift. 1 Partly fueled by growth of the massive weight loss population over the past decade, surgeons performing contouring procedures of the torso and extremities have achieved greater technical finesse and have a wider range of options to address an inherently heterogeneous population. The increase in literature in this field reflects the expanding interest. [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] While a great deal of attention has been focused on technique, other issues related to body contouring procedures require more attention. One of these issues is how to make these typically lengthy procedures more efficient, particularly when addressing several body regions in a single surgical session. One of the most challenging hindrances to efficiency in body contouring is wound closure. Traditional layered wound closure technique is timeconsuming, and it has other problems beyond time constraints. For example, the longer the patient is on the operating room table, the greater the risk of hypothermia. 7 Hypothermia also occurs secondary to loss of thermoregulatory control with anesthesia and is associated with an increased risk of postoperative infection, coagulopathies, and heart attack. [7] [8] [9] [10] Prolonged surgical procedures are also associated with significant blood loss, venous thromboembolism, and pulmonary issues. Traditional wound closure technique depends on multiple interrupted deep and subcutaneous sutures, leading to inflammatory reactions, causing uncomfortable palpable nodules and potentially exacerbating hypertrophic scars. Large dead spaces associated with bodylifting procedures set up the risk of seroma formation, requiring drain placement for adequate evacuation of fluid and risking bacterial inoculation of any retained seroma fluid. 11, 12 Procedures in the axilla or groin may result in temporary lymphatic obstruction, leading to lymphedema and exacerbation of infections in the involved limb. With all of these concerns in mind, the field of body contouring surgery is ripe for a new paradigm in wound closure.
One proposed solution to optimize outcomes is barbed suture technology. Barbed sutures originally gained popularity in minimally invasive facelifting but have demonstrated questionable results in maintaining a stable, remarkable outcome. [13] [14] [15] [16] The facelift barbed suture, applied with the use of a trochar, is primarily a 2-0 polypropylene, permanent suture and may have uni-or bidirectional barbs. The primary mechanism of action of these sutures in the face is purchase of the barbs opposite to the direction of pull, anchoring the tissues and maintaining suspension. 15 Histologic studies have demonstrated creation of a fibrous scar interface with the suture, improving tissue purchase and longevity of outcome. 15 Extrusion, infection, and palpability have all been reported complications in the literature. 13, 16 Long-term clinical outcomes have not proven to meet the theoretic advantages of barbed sutures in the face, and concerns about underreporting of actual complication rates have been raised, particularly with regard to potential suture breakage with dynamic facial movement and failure of the barbs from tension. 13, 16 Barbed suture technology in face and neck rejuvenation has remained a niche treatment, and use of these sutures is currently "off-label" for this type of surgery.
Barbed suture technology has extended beyond face and neck rejuvenation applications to hand surgery, urogynecologic surgery, and body contouring surgery, but there is only limited literature. [17] [18] [19] In body contouring surgery, barbed sutures were originally marketed for approximation of the Scarpa's fascia layer in the subcutaneous fat, also known as the superficial fascial system (SFS) described by Dr Ted Lockwood 20, 21 in his writings. One of the benefits of the sutures is that they allow for a running closure, which is faster than interrupted sutures for wound approximation. The barbs provide even distribution across the wound, even tension across the closure, and optimization of the resultant scar. 22 Further improving scar outcome is the lack of knots, reducing inflammatory focus. Specifications for this suture include that it be placed deeply in the subcutaneous fat, so it is not externally exposed, and that at the end of the closure, a backward bite be taken to anchor the suture and prevent unraveling. 22 The literature describing use of barbed sutures in body contouring surgery is sparse. Our center published an outcomes study investigating the use of the Quill sutures for Scarpa's fascia approximation in body contouring surgery. 23 The Quill SRS (Angiotech Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada) comes in permanent and absorbable varieties, and barbs are arrayed in opposing directions on either side of a transitional, unbarbed segment, with a needle on each end. The 0 PDO suture used in our previous study was made of absorbable monofilament, dyed polydiaxanone, comparable in caliber to a traditional 2-0 suture. Absorption of the 0 PDO suture is minimal until approximately 120 days and essentially complete by 180 days. 24 Barbed sutures were used for Scarpa's fascia closure for body regions including the arms, chest, abdomen, and thighs ( Figure 1 ). The 0 PDO suture is double-armed, and there is a nonbarbed area in the middle of the suture. The sutures were placed into the Scarpa's fascia, and when pulled taut through the tissue, they caught in the middle of the suture without barbs. Closure then advanced lateral to the central suture. The dermis was then approximated with buried 3-0 monofilament absorbable sutures followed by a running subcuticular 4-0 monofilament absorbable suture. Tissue glue was then placed after operating on the back or thigh.
In that study, 910 operations in 496 patients were analyzed, and barbed sutures were placed in 114 cases in the abdomen (n = 98), bilateral thigh (n = 8), bilateral arm (n = 7), and bilateral chest (n = 1). 23 On unadjusted analysis, the wound complication rate with barbed sutures was 17.5%, compared with 12.0% when barbed sutures were not used (P = .093). On multilevel multivariable analysis, age (odds ratio [OR], 1.04) and body mass index at contour (OR, 1.05) were significant in impairing wound healing (P < .01), and barbed sutures were not associated with wound complication rate. Body mass index has generally been well documented as a high-risk variable in predicting less than optimal outcomes, and the impact of age is just starting to unveil itself as a prognosticator of poor surgical outcomes throughout the subspecialties. [25] [26] [27] In our subset analysis, barbed sutures were associated with significantly higher wound complication rates in the arm (OR, 8.4; P = .046; Figure 2 ). It was difficult to compare time required for placement of barbed sutures versus traditional sutures because the cases were variable, consisting of different body regions in a heterogeneous population. For this reason, it was also difficult to scientifically compare scar outcome as a potential benefit of barbed sutures as well. 24 Overall, this study revealed an unremarkable benefit of barbed suture, particularly in body contouring procedures involving multiple body regions. In fact, complications occurred that appeared to be specific to the introduction of barbed sutures. Workman et al 28 reported a case in which a similar type of barbed suture extrusion was reported where barbed sutures used for superficial closure required operative removal due to infection, fever, and wound-healing issues.
Warner and Gutowski 29 published a study investigating the use of barbed sutures in isolated abdominoplasty procedures, using the barbed suture for progressive tension closure (Figure 3 ). This progressive tension method of closure, originally described by Pollack and Pollack, 30 approximates the deep subcutaneous fat to the abdominal wall to close dead space and eliminate the need for drains. The modified progressive tension closure technique with Quill sutures uses barbed sutures to plicate the abdominoplasty flap to the underlying abdominal wall. The placement of the suture is performed with a running suture technique and provides progressive tension, resulting in minimal tension along the incision line. Data from 58 patients revealed a marked reduction in the time necessary to perform the modified progressive tension suture technique using barbed sutures compared with previously published data. 29 Rosen 31 published his experience with progressive tension abdominoplasty as well, demonstrating a time improvement with barbed sutures; however, sample numbers were small and statistical analysis was not performed.
Jandali et al 32 investigated the use of barbed sutures in breast surgery. While they found time savings with barbed sutures, in bilateral cases more than in unilateral cases, they also found a higher rate of wound complications. They concluded that there was a cost benefit but an increased risk of wound complications, including dehiscence, infection, and suture extrusion, which only trended toward significance. Gilliland et al 33 also found a shorter operative time with barbed suture utilization, saving 2.3 minutes in knee reconstruction procedures, but the authors believed the difference had little clinical significance. They found similar outcomes and no difference in complication outcomes between conventional suture and barbed suture closure.
Barbed suture design will undoubtedly see modification over time. Engineers are working to optimize barb design for more specific tissue applications, including modification of geometric shape, frequency, alignment, and sequence of barbs. Studies have been performed utilizing tensiometry and simulation with finite element analysis to determine the effect of changing certain variables of the suture-namely, barb length and barb angle-and they have determined that increasing length improves anchoring and that different angles are best for skin versus tendon.

Barbed suture technology has captured interest for its applications in body contouring surgery. The literature is sparse and demands more objective data to demonstrate the actual, not just theoretical, benefits of barbed sutures and to ascertain that the benefits outweigh the risks. The field of body contouring surgery would certainly benefit from a technology that expedites surgical times and improves outcomes.
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and publication of this article. 
Jimmy Toussaint, et al.
The American Burn Association estimates that each year 450,000 burn injuries are treated at medical facilities across the US. Of these, 40,000 require hospital admission, including 30,000 at specialized hospital burn centers. The most common etiologies requiring burn center admission are fire/flame (43%), followed narrowly by scalds (34%), contact with hot objects (9%), electricity (4%), and chemical agents (3%). 1 Annually, there are 3,400 deaths related to fires, burn and smoke inhalation, with over 2,550 (72%), occurring in the home. The majority of burn patients are males (69%), while children under 16, account for 29%. The overall survival rate of patients admitted to burn centers stands at 96.6%. 1 Despite the large number of burns presenting to the emergency department, the majority do not require admission or surgery and can be managed by emergency practitioners with timely follow-up with a burn specialist in most cases, except for the most minor ones.
The skin with an average surface area of 1.8 m 2 is the largest organ of the body, approximating 16% of the total body's weight. One of the skin's main functions is to protect the interior body against mechanical, thermal, physical and chemical agents, by creating a barrier against the external environment. Burn injuries result in various local and systemic responses. At the local level, heat causes acute changes such as protein denaturation, disruption in collagen cross-linking, damage to endothelial and epithelial cells and blood vessel occlusion. Additionally, increased permeability of blood vessels occurs leading to edema. Historically, the pathophysiology of burn injuries has been described using Jackson's 1953 3-dimensional burn wound model. 2 The zone of coagulation, the area nearest the source of heat, is surrounded by a zone of stasis, further surrounded by a zone of hyperemia at the periphery. One of the critical aims in managing burn injuries is to prevent this middle ischemic region from becoming necrotic due to hypoperfusion, edema or infection. 3, 4 Apoptosis in the ischemic region may also contribute to irreversible tissue death. 5 The outermost zone of hyperemia is characterized by reversible vasodilation, caused by the production of inflammatory mediators. 3, 4 Unless there are complications caused by infection or hypoperfusion, the tissue in this outer region usually recovers fully. 6 In response to injury, there is local and systemic release of a host of inflammatory mediators, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) often confounded by local infection. Among the circulating vasoactive and inflammatory mediators are the histamines, prostaglandins, kinins, platelet aggregation factors, angiotensin II, vasopressin, and corticotropin-releasing factors 6 and cell signaling proteins such as cytokines and chemokines. 7 Oxidative stress and recurring cycles of ischemia and reperfusion also play a role in burn injury progression. 8 The massive fluid shifts, especially in burns involving greater than 20% of the total body surface area (TBSA), may result in burn edema and burn shock. 9 Severe burn shock is both distributive and hypovolemic in nature, 10 and is manifested by decreases in both urine output and cardiac output and increases in pulmonary and systemic vascular resistances and lowered plasma volume resulting in elevations in hematocrit and hemoglobin values. Hypovolemia can be corrected by effective fluid resuscitation based on the patient's weight and size of the burn. 11 Even if hypovolemia is alleviated, myocardial depression may continue, leading to multiple organ dysfunction and death. 6 Inhalation injury is caused by heat exposure and inhaling toxic smoke products of incomplete combustion (e.g., carbon monoxide [CO], cyanide, the aldehydes and oxides of sulfur and nitrogen), and particulate matter. The presence of inhalation injury significantly increases mortality. 1 Inhalation injuries are generally classified into three classes: (1) thermal injuries to the upper airways, (2) chemical irritation and injuries to the lower respiratory tract, and (3) systemic toxicity owing to noxious gases such as CO and cyanide. 12, 13 Thermal injury below the vocal cords is uncommon owing to a highly efficient heat exchange system in the oro-and nasopharynx and the low heat capacity of the airways and the reflex mechanism of laryngeal closure. Similar to burns of the skin, thermal injuries of the airways damage epithelial cells, denature proteins and initiate a cascade of inflammatory responses, which causes the release of ROS and RNS resulting in widespread damage to cells. Poly(ADP ribose) polymerase (PARP) is also activated, resulting in the depletion of adenosine triphosphate from cells, resulting in further necrosis and apoptosis. [13] [14] [15] [16] All these events lead to increased microvascular pressure and enhanced endothelium permeability for proteins, and results in edema formation of the epiglottis and swelling of the tongue causing obstruction of the airways. 13, 17, 18 Injuries to the lower respiratory tract and the pulmonary parenchyma are mostly caused by toxic chemicals in smoke leading to a reduced ability of the mucociliary transport system to eliminate excess mucus and other secretions reducing bacterial clearance and increasing the likelihood of infection. Furthermore, surfactant loss causes alveolar collapse and atelectasis. Additionally, there may be bronchitis, bronchial swelling, bronchospasm, impairment of lung compliance and increases in dead space ventilation and ventilation-perfusion mismatches. 12 Markedly, there is also the production of a transudate/ exudate mixture with a high protein content, which along with
The evaluation and management of thermal injuries de-epithelialized cells, inflammatory cells, fibrin and mucus solidifies to form a pseudomembranous "cast" which may partially or completely block the airways. CO has a much higher ( > 200 X) affinity for hemoglobin than oxygen and causes a leftward shift in the hemoglobin saturation curve leading to tissue hypoxia. Cyanide, a common component in plastics, inhibits the mitochondrial respiratory chain leading to cytotoxic hypoxia and metabolic acidosis. Additionally, circulating proinflammatory mediators released by the lung may cause the systemic inflammatory response syndrome and multi-organ failure.

Burn depth is considered one of the more important determinants of outcome. First-degree burns are limited to the outer layer or epidermis of the skin. The skin usually appears red and dry and is very painful to the touch. Healing takes place in 3-5 days. Partial thickness or second-degree burns are further categorized into superficial and deep partial thickness burns. A superficial partial thickness burn extends into the superficial papillary dermis and appears red in color with significant weeping and blisters (Fig.  1A ). It will also blanch when pressure is applied and may take between 2-3 weeks to heal. Deep partial thickness burns extend into the reticular dermis and appear yellow or white and dry and may take greater than 3 weeks to heal (Fig. 1B) . These burns are extremely painful; however in some cases, the sensation in the deep partial thickness may become diminished. Full thickness or third-degree burns extend through the entire thickness of the dermis. These may appear dry, leathery, black or white and are usually painless since nerves may be destroyed (Fig. 1C) . They do not blanch under pressure. Fourth degree burns extend through the entire skin thickness including the fat and underlying tendon, muscle and bone. They also appear charred and black. 19 There are several methods for determining burn depth such as vital dyes, tissue biopsies and ultrasound, that are able to detect dead cells or denatured collagen. 20 Others such as fluorescein perfusion fluoroscopy, 21 laser Doppler flowmetry 22 and thermography 23 evaluate changes in blood flow. Nuclear magnetic resonance 24 can also be used to determine burn depth by observing changes such as edema. However, clinical evaluation by an experienced burn practitioner still remains the standard method used to determine burn depth. 25 This method is only 50%-75% accurate and relies on subjective features such as sensation to pin prick, bleeding on needle prick, wound appearance and ability to blanch. 26, 27 Since burns tend to progress over the first 2-3 days after injury, burn depth estimation may not be accurate on the initial evaluation. Close monitoring may be required before accurate burn depth determinations are made. In addition to burn depth, the extent or TBSA of the burn injury also needs to be evaluated. Estimation of burn area, even by experts, may be inaccurate. As such, clinical rules and charts are used to improve accuracy in estimating TBSA. The three most commonly used methods include the Lund-Brower chart, Wallace rule of nines, and Palmer surface. 27 The Lund-Brower chart is considered the most accurate, if used correctly. It allows for the variation in body proportions with age, and is used especially in children. The Wallace rule of nines is used in adults since it is not accurate in children. With this method, the body is divided into areas of 9% of the body surface area (the head, each upper limb, the front of the trunk, the back of the trunk, the front of each lower extremity, and the back of each lower extremity). The surface area of the patient's palm (including the fingers), approximately 1% of the TBSA, is used to estimate small ( < 10% TBSA) burns. However, this method is inaccurate for larger sized burns. 27 Inaccurate estimation of burn size by clinicians is common, often leading to inappropriate patient transfers and excessive fluid resuscitation. 28, 29 A chart review of 97 burn referrals to the Danish National Burn Center over a 3 month period found that 30% of the referrals were unnecessary mostly due to overestimation of burn size and depth. 30 Various technologies such as mobile phones applications (apps) 31 and software 32 have been developed to help improve burn size estimation. Introduction of telemedicine among burn centers has been shown to improve the accuracy of burn size estimation. 33 In one study, use of telemedicine reduced air transport of burn patients to a regional burn center from 100% to 44%.


Edema formation occurs when there is direct exposure of the upper airway to superheated gases and toxic fumes. One of the most critical decisions is determining if and when the patient requires protection of their airway, preferably by endotracheal intubation. In some patients the decision to intubate is very clear, such as in the presence of respiratory distress, copious carbonaceous sputum or obvious swelling of the oropharynx. In others, such as in the presence of facial edema, singed nasal vibrissae, or very large burns, the decision is more difficult. The safest approach however has been early intubation. Early endotracheal intubation guided by fiberoptic bronchoscopy should be strongly considered in patients with large burns ( > 40% TBSA) as edema formation may progress to impair or completely occlude the airways within minutes to hours. 35 Additionally, it avoids the need for surgical cricothyrotomy or needle cricothyrotomy or later difficult intubation and allows for proper management of analgesia and sedation. 36 However, there is now mounting evidence that routine "prophylactic" endotracheal intubation may be harmful to many patients. A recent review by Mackie 37 summarized evidence supporting the hypothesis that mechanical ventilation may be contributing to the pathogenesis of the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) often seen in patients with presumed inhalation injury. Ventilator associated lung injury is probably the result of the release of inflammatory mediators induced by the pressure and volume changes associated with mechanical ventilation. 38 Ventilator associated pneumonia, with a mortality of roughly 10%, is also seen in 9%-27% of ventilated burn patients. A retrospective study of burn patients with large ( > 30% TBSA) burns found that the number of patients subjected to mechanical ventilation increased from 38% to 76% between 1987 and 2006 despite similar patient and burn characteristics. However, inhalation injury could not be confirmed in 57% of intubated patients. 39 Another study of 879 burn patients intubated over a 13 year period found that 28% were intubated "prophylactically" with 12% being extubated that same day and 21% on the next day, with none requiring re-intubation suggesting that endotracheal intubation may not have been necessary. 40 If there is any doubt regarding the presence of airway edema or inhalation injury, early visualization of the airway should be performed using fiberoptic or direct laryngoscopy using topical anesthesia (Fig. 2) . If the airway appears normal, endotracheal intubation may be deferred. However, such patients may still require close observation or repeated evaluations of their airway if conditions change. If endotracheal intubation is clearly indicated, intubation with the patient awake using topical anesthesia and moderate sedation is recommended. Small intravenous doses of ketamine (10-20 mg) may help facilitate airway evaluation and management. Endotracheal intubation over a fiberoptic bronchoscope or long laryngoscope may be required. Rarely, surgical management (e.g., cricothyrotomy) of the airway may also be required. One significant risk associated with endotracheal intubation is airway obstruction caused by overproduction of mucous. In that case, suctioning should be carried out frequently. 35 In addition, several techniques have been developed to deal with the difficulties associated with securing of the endotracheal tube in burn patients.
41

The evaluation and management of thermal injuries
Humidified oxygen should be administered either by mechanical ventilation or through a high flow facemask to maintain oxygen saturations greater than 92%. For fluid administration and drug infusion in patients with severe burns, intravenous access should be obtained via large peripheral veins, preferably through nonburned skin. Patients should also be monitored for urine output and evaluated for rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria using an indwelling urinary catheter. A double lumen nasogastric tube should also be used with large burns as patients may experience gastroparesis and possible vomiting, which may compromise ventilation and put them at risk of aspiration. Patients should also undergo cardiac monitoring and assessment of arterial oxygenation and body core temperature. Pulmonary artery catheterization should be considered in patients suffering from burn shock and with significant comorbidities such as heart failure, as this may allow for improved fluid resuscitation.

The diagnosis of inhalation injury can be highly subjective and has traditionally been based on a combination of clinical findings such as patient history, physical examination and carboxyhemoglobin levels. Patient history should include the duration of exposure, whether the patient was found in an enclosed space, and the amount of inhaled irritants and type of toxins involved. Other factors such as advanced age, large TBSA, the presence of carbonaceous sputum, facial burns and oropharyngeal edema, all correlate with a greater likelihood of suffering inhalation injury. Diagnostic certainty however, is improved by fiberoptic bronchoscopy, which has been reported to have a sensitivity of 0.79 and specificity of 0.94 when performed within 24 hours of admission. 42 This "gold standard" is useful in identifying the presence of soot, edema, inflammation and airway necrosis. 43 There have also been attempts to develop scoring systems based on bronchoscopic evaluation in order to predict the development of ARDS. 44, 45 Fiberoptic bronchoscopy may underestimate the presence of parenchymal disease. 46 In that case, Xenon scanning has been suggested, 47 however most hospital settings do not have access to this technology. 48 Another technique that has potential clinical value for assessing inhalation injury, is the use of thermal and dye dilution measurements to estimate extravascular lung water. 49, 50 CO poisoning is one of the most common causes of death from inhalation injury. Immediate management involves the administration of 100% normobaric oxygen delivered via a non-rebreather reservoir facemask. This should continue until a carboxyhemoglobin level of < 5% is achieved. 12 The use of hyperbaric oxygen remains controversial and is beyond the scope of this review.
Cyanide is also a common toxic inhalation irritant causing inhalation injury, however because of its short blood half-life (~1 hour), accurate determination of cyanide poisoning is hampered by delayed blood sampling. Blood CO concentration is highly correlated with cyanide and as such, may be considered as an indicator of cyanide poisoning. 51 Two antidotes are approved for treatment of cyanide poisoning in the US: the traditional cyanide antidote kit (consisting of amyl nitrite, 10% sodium nitrite, 25% sodium thiosulfate) and hydroxocobalamin, the latter which appears to be more tolerable, especially in patients with pre-existing hypotension, those who are pregnant or those found in enclosed spaces. 52 There are no specific treatment strategies for mechanical ventilation. As such, clinicians are guided by the American College of Chest Physicians recommendations. 53 There are several mechanical ventilator techniques, each with their advantages and disadvantages, providing alternate options for inhalation injury patients. 46 The mode chosen should complement the clinical team's experience and should support oxygenation and ventilation. Achieving an oxygen saturation level > 92% and limiting plateau pressures to 35 cmH2O or less will help minimize the incidence of barotrauma. Positive end-respiratory pressure, which supports airways patency by maintaining the positive pressure in the lungs at the end of expiration, is also used to control oxygenation and should be reassessed regularly. Permissive hypercapnia, where blood carbon dioxide partial pressure (PCO2) is allowed to rise ( < 60 mmHg) should be considered to limit plateau pressures. Studies have shown that smaller tidal volumes (4-6 mL/kg) are associated with lower mortality in patients with ARDS, 46, 54 and are therefore also recommended in burn patients.
Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) methods, such as continuous positive airway pressure and pressure support ventilation may be considered in patients who are awake and cooperative. 12,55 NIV avoids the trauma associated with endotracheal intubation, allows patients to communicate better with the clinicians, requires less sedation and allows better maintenance of oral hygiene. 12 Although not in routine clinical use, there are several promising experimental pharmaceutical adjuncts that address physiologic changes associated with inhalation injury. Aerosolized racemic epinephrine serves as a bronchodilator, vasoconstrictor and mucolytic agent to alleviate wheezing and bronchospasm caused by chemical tracheobronchitis. 46 An aerosolized N-acetylcysteine/ heparin combination therapy which acts as both an oxygen free radical scavenger and a mucolytic agent has also been successfully used in children and adults with inhalation injury. This combination was found to reduce re-intubation rates, atelectasis and mortality. [56] [57] [58] Holt et al., 59 however, did not find any significant improvements in a follow up study done in patients treated with Jimmy Toussaint, et al.
this combination. Several clinical trials have also been conducted using β-agonists to treat acute lung injury or ARDS, pathological conditions similar to inhalation injury. [60] [61] [62] [63] Several studies in humans and animals suggest that nitric oxide may also improve outcomes.

Burns are associated with significant fluid shifts and losses due to local and systemic changes in vascular permeability, which may result in hypovolemic shock. Fluid resuscitation should balance the need to restore organ perfusion while avoiding fluid overload, which is often referred to as "fluid creep." 68 Overly aggressive fluid administration may result in pulmonary edema, abdominal or extremity compartment syndromes, as well as the extension of the burn injury due to excessive local edema. Factors that contribute to "fluid creep" include overestimation of the burn size, emphasis on achieving supra-physiological hemodynamic targets, and excessive vasodilatation associated with excessive use of opioids. Equally important has been the general hesitancy for reducing the rate of fluid administration in patients with evidence of adequate tissue perfusion such as a urine output greater than 30-50 mL/hr in adults or greater than 0.5-1.0 mL/kg in children under 30 kg in weight. Whichever fluid resuscitation formula is chosen, this should only be used as a starting point with the need to closely monitor and titrate fluid administration based on clinical parameters such as mental status, urine output and vital signs. Among the numerous fluid resuscitation formulas available, the Parkland is most commonly used which calls for 4 mL/ kg/%TBSA of Ringer's Lactate (RL) solution given over the first 24 hours, half of which is given within the first 8 hours from the time of injury. A recent study demonstrated that when the Parkland formula was used, patients received an average of 6.3 mL/ kg/%TBSA over the first 24 hours. 69 Excessive fluid administration was primarily related to inadequate reduction in fluid infusion in response to excessive urine output. The Brooke formula that calls for initial administration of RL 2 mL/kg/%TBSA over the first 24 hours with frequent adjustments based on clinical response may be preferred in order to reduce the likelihood of "fluid creep." The simplest method for calculating the initial fluid requirement proposed by the United States Armed Forces Institute of Surgical Research is the "Rule of Ten." Based on this rule the patient should receive 10 mL RL per hour for every %TBSA with hourly adjustments based on urine output and clinical response. 70 For every 10 kg above 80 kg, an additional 100 mL of fluid should be given. With this method the fluid rate may be over-estimated in patients weighing < 40 kg, and under estimated in patients weighing > 140 kg. The Burn Resuscitation Index (BRI), in which a burn score is assigned based on the patient's weight and estimated burn size, may also be used to help improve the accuracy of fluid estimation. 71 When compared with the Parkland formula, the BRI significantly improved the percentage of emergency medicine residents who correctly calculated fluid rates. 71 Several smartphone software apps have been developed for use in healthcare, among them uBurn and MerseyBurns, which can be used to calculate fluid requirement using the Parkland formula. 72 Monitoring urine output, 0.5 mL/kg/hr in adults and 0.5-1.0 mL/kg/hr in children less than 30 kg in weight, remains one of the primary means of determining the adequacy of fluid resuscitation. 10 Deciding on the best fluid to use, has generated widespread debate and controversy-the crystalloid versus colloid debate. 73 Because of their low cost and availability, isotonic crystalloids have preferentially been used for early resuscitation in burn victims. In the US, RL solution, which most closely approximates normal body fluid, has been the principal resuscitation fluid utilized. 74 Colloids have the potential to increase oncotic pressure and thereby reduce fluid shifts and losses. However, due to an increase in vascular permeability, colloids often do not stay within the intravascular space and may actually increase tissue and pulmonary edema. A recent large multicenter study demonstrated that colloids do not reduce mortality when compared with crystalloids. 74 Colloids may be beneficial after the first 12-24 hours at which time most patients will no longer be in the emergency department. The evidence supporting the use of hypertonic saline is controversial, [75] [76] [77] [78] and its use should be limited to centers and practitioners experienced in its use. 79 There have also been appeals for alternatives to IV fluid resuscitation in the case of mass burn casualties or austere conditions where IV therapy may be limited. One suggestion has been to use the oral route with World Health Organization oral rehydration solutions in patients with burns smaller than 30% TBSA.

Local care of burns generally involves stopping the burning process, cleansing, debridement, and application of topical ointments and/or dressings to support healing. It is well established that initial cooling of the burn surface has many benefits such as alleviating pain, ending the progression of tissue necrosis caused by elevated temperature and possibly aiding in wound healing. 82 What are controversial however are the ideal cooling agent, optimal timing, duration and temperature of cooling agent. Tap water (12°C-18°C) for 30 minutes has been shown in animal studies to reduce necrosis and enhance healing. 83 It is necessary to remove
The evaluation and management of thermal injuries all burned clothing, belts, watches, rings etc. and begin cleansing and debridement utilizing soap and water or a mild skin disinfectant. Non-adherent necrotic skin should be removed and the wound covered with a topical antimicrobial agent and overlying simple non-adherent dressing or an advanced occlusive dressing until the wound is completely reepithelialized. First-degree burns generally do not require topical therapies, however topical application of anesthetics, aloe vera and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 84, 85 may be considered. Furthermore, analgesics may be given orally. Because of their tendency to progress and heal with significant scarring, deep partial thickness and full thickness burns generally require consultation with a burn specialist for possible excision and grafting. Until then the burns should be covered with a topical antimicrobial agent. The management of burn blisters, which are mostly seen in superficial partial thickness burns, remains controversial. Those in favor of leaving blisters intact argue that the blister functions as a biological dressing reducing the risk of contamination and infection while providing an optimal moist environment for healing. Those in favor of deroofing and debriding the blisters argue that the blister fluid contains substances detrimental to wound healing (such as thromboxane A2) and that the fluid provides media for bacterial growth. A practical compromise is to aspirate or deroof large or tense blisters and those over joints, which are likely to rupture anyway. 86 Patients may also require a tetanus toxoid booster (diphtheria and tetanus) if they have not received one in the last 5 years. For patients who have never received primary immunization, passive tetanus immune globulin should be given.
In general there are two methods used to treat partial thickness burns.
In the "open method," an antimicrobial containing topical cream or ointment covered by a simple dressing (except on the face) is used. In the "closed method," an advanced occlusive burn dressing (many of which contain silver), is used (Table 1) . The advantage of topical creams, and especially ointments, is their ability to maintain a moist wound environment as well as providing antimicrobial activity to reduce local wound infection. They are also less expensive than advanced dressings. Use of topical antimicrobial agents is especially helpful in heavily weeping, contaminated or infected burns. Their major disadvantage is the need for frequent (once or twice daily) and painful dressing changes. The advanced burns dressings are more expensive, but may be left on the burn for up to a week, reducing the need for painful dressing changes. Many of these dressings are also designed to absorb exudate and maintain a moist healing environment. Since they reduce the need for dressing changes, advanced dressings, such as the silver based Mepilex Ag (Molnlycke Health Care, Gothenburg, Sweden) and Aquacel Ag (ConvaTec, Skillman, NJ, USA), are more cost effective than silver sulfadiazine (SSD).
SSD was introduced nearly 50 years ago and has led to a significant reduction in the incidence of burn wound sepsis. Indeed, SSD is still the most commonly used topical therapy for burn wounds. However, there is growing evidence that SSD is no longer a good choice since it may delay healing. A systemic review of 30 randomized control trials found that hydrocolloids, silver containing antimicrobial dressings, polyurethane film and biosynthetic dressings appear to be beneficial to wound healing, while SSD was consistently associated with poor healing. 88 In vitro studies have also shown that SSD is toxic to keratinocytes and fibroblasts. 89, 90 As such, SSD no longer should be routinely used to treat non-infected burns. A comparison of topical agents and dressings is presented in Table 1 . A silicone surfaced foam dressing that slowly releases silver (Mepilex Ag), adheres to dry skin, but is non-ad- 
The necrotic eschar that forms with deep burns is often stiff and unyielding having leather-like mechanical properties. When the eschar overlies vital structures, especially when circumferential, it may compromise circulation (in the extremities) or breathing (when over the thorax or neck). Increases in tissue pressure may be exacerbated during fluid resuscitation, causing dangerous elevations in tissue pressure. This may result in ischemia leading to tissue necrosis 92 if not recognized and treated aggressively by performing an escharotomy. An escharotomy is performed by making an incision, either with a surgical blade or electric cautery, through the eschar to release the underlying pressure. The incision should be made all the way down to the fat resulting in splitting of the stiff eschar shell. Since there is little pain with full thickness burns, escharotomies may be performed with very little analgesia or sedation. Placement of the incisions should avoid injury to underlying structures such as nerves and vessels. With extremity eschars, incisions should be made over the medial and lateral aspects of the extremity. With eschars of the thorax incisions should be made along the anterior axillary lines, costal margins, and below and parallel to the clavicles in a V shape. There is insufficient scientific data to support any specific standard or objective test to help identify early signs of compartment syndrome to aid the clinician in deciding on whether an escharotomy is warranted. 92, 93 Traditionally, deciding on performing an escharotomy has been based on decreased or absent palpable pulses, pulse oximetry signals 94 or Doppler signals. 95 Increased pain (especially with passive motion), pallor, motor weakness, and loss of sensation may also be associated with a compartment syndrome. 92 Difficult ventilation or airway obstruction may indicate the need for an escharotomy of the thorax and neck respectively.
Effective pain management for severely burned victims can be problematic. 96 During the early emergent phase, potent opioids such as morphine sulfate, hydromorphone and fentanyl should be given intravenously and titrated based on patient response. 96, 97 For moderate pain, an oral oxycodone/acetaminophen mixture may be used while oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and acetaminophen can be administered for minor pain. 97 Antidepressants, anticonvulsants, and antianxiety agents have also been found to be useful adjuvants in pain management of burn patients. 98 Ketamine, at sub-dissociative doses of 0.1-0.2 mg/kg can be given intravenously, especially in patients who are resistant to large doses of opioids.
The American Burn Association has established criteria for referral to a specialized burn center that include both patient and burn characteristics such as size, depth, and etiology (Table 2) . 99 
Host-plant specialisation is common and central to explanations for the enormous diversity of plant-feeding insects. Phytophagous insects vary in the taxonomic breadth of their respective host-plant range, but most still tend to use only a fraction of the plants available to them in their environment [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . Generally, selection promoting both the broadening and reduction of hostplant resources must take place. Host-plant conservatism is not universal and selection for generalised host associations is expected to be persistent because of characteristics such as resource abundance variability or environmental predictability [6, 7] . Colonisation of a new plant taxon signifies the broadening of a species host range, and specialisation on traits of the host show a narrowing of resource use. Explaining mechanisms that cause expansions or contractions in host-ranges has been difficult especially for species rich interactions [8] because the vagaries of time tend to obscure complex patterns of association [9] . Here we investigate the timing of colonisation by a lineage that evolved diverse specialised modes of resource-use but remained relatively species depauperate.
The enormous diversity of phytophagous insects has been attributed to traits associated with the insect herbivore (diet tolerances for plants and oviposition preferences), the plants they parasitise (defense strategies against herbivores), the interaction itself ('coevolution'), ecological community interactions (predation & competition), or the environment (bottom-up forces). Conventional hypotheses posit 'reciprocal' or 'sequential' bitrophic interactions between traits of diversifying clades that drive insect and plant radiations [10] [11] [12] . Trade-offs in reproduction or diet, competition and predation, and tolerance to plant 'defensive' traits are central to these arguments [2, 13] . Alternative explanations argue host-plant conservatism can be driven by predictability [14] , climate [15] , lifehistory characteristics [16] , geographical contexts [17] , plasticity [18] , genetic predispositions or ecological compatibilities suited to the use of a resource [19] , and hostrange ecology [20] or genetics [21] . To distinguish among these causal mechanisms it is necessary to study evolutionary periods that are meaningful to the association of interest. Transitions to specialisation on a novel hostplant resource are only meaningful for a finite period because a shift to a narrower set of resources can be transient or bidirectional [3, 8, 22] . Determining the period that separates the origin of the insect group and the hostplants they feed on is essential to unraveling hypotheses explaining the origin or loss of narrow host ranges.
Discerning between colonisation and becoming reproductively isolated on the novel resource requires understanding distinct processes. The first phase in the evolution of a conservative host-plant affiliation is colonisation. Colonisation signifies a potential prelude to adaptation to a novel resource [5] . Colonisation of a novel plant lineage is either a fundamental shift to a resource previously not utilised in the evolutionary past or a secondarily derived association with a lineage used in the past [8] . The phylogenetic distance and dispersion among terminal host taxa has been used to distinguish between these two possibilities [23, 24] . Furthermore, the relative time between the most recent common ancestor (MRCA) of the host lineage and inferred colonisation is expected to be indicative of the extent of the distance in resource space between natal and novel host [25] . This measure is informative because it describes the extent of nicheexpansion, differences between alternative niches, and provides a framework for identifying trade-offs between them. The most direct means of testing this distance is to determine whether the common ancestors of insect and plant clades are contemporaneous or not. The second phase following initial contact leads to reproductive isolation on the new host that is assumed to ensue via disruptive selection in sympatry, or by gene flow disruption and drift in allopatric or parapatric isolation.
Acacia (sensu stricto) Mill. (Leguminosae, Mimosoideae) is broadly distributed over Australia with an estimated 1020 species. A fossil-calibrated molecular study has placed the origin of the legume subfamily Mimosoideae at approximately 42 Mya [26] . The fossil record indicates that species of subfamily Mimisoideae assignable to genera other than Acacia (sensu lato) [27] were present in the eastern Great Australian Bight approximately 37 Mya during the Oligocene. Australian Acacia is thus an immigrant taxon among a number of mimosoid genera and probably established in Australia during the Late Oligocene-Early Miocene [27] . The evidence suggests Acacia became a dominant part of sclerophyll communities in Australia during the Pliocene 7.0 -1.5 Mya.
Thrips (Thysanoptera, Tubulifera, Phlaeothripinae) that parasitise Australian Acacia are uncharacteristic of the other 5500 estimated Thysanopteran species that mostly exhibit generalist relationships with plants [28] . Most of the Tubulifera species (ca. 60%, [29] ) are fungivorous, some phytophagous, and fewer still are predators. Approximately 15% of the 2000 thrips species belonging to the Tubulifera are able to induce galls. Endemic northern tropical Australian thrips include species belonging to genera present in Southeast Asian in the wet tropics [30] suggesting thrips in Australia had an ancestral origin in a tropical environment. Thrips specialising on Acacia comprise several distinct behavioural suites that exhibit variation in host-specificity and oviposition strategies [31] . Acacia thrips, estimated to be in excess of 230 species [32] , feed almost exclusively on sections Phyllodineae Pedley, Plurinerves Benth., and Juliflorae Benth. (ca. 397 spp., 216 spp., 255 spp. respectively, [33] ). Of the 1020 Acacia species, approximately 950 develop phyllodes, the expanded petiole believed to be necessary for the radiation of thrips on Acacia. The most current molecular systematics of Thysanoptera supports the monophyly of this group [34] . The domicile-building Acacia thrips tie or glue phyllodes with silk to create a chamber. Kleptoparasitic thrips species invade and kill gall-inducing or domicile-building thrips on Acacia while opportunistic Acacia thrips species utilise the abandoned domiciles, galls, or similar constructions of other insect orders.
Here we construct the most comprehensive Acacia (sensu stricto) molecular phylogeny to date and compare it with the evolutionary history of Acacia thrips. We expect one of three possible scenarios (Figure 1 ) explain the colonisation of Acacia by thrips, each with a distinct timing pattern. Phylogenetically contemporaneous common ancestors of insect and host plant are explained by insect lineages tracking the host with conserved host switching among related taxa. A pattern showing a considerably younger insect common ancestor compared to that of the host lineage is expected when a lineage that has not been used in its recent evolutionary past is colonised. An insect common ancestor that predates the host lineage requires invoking extinctions of insect lineages on other plant taxa or extinctions of distantly related ancestral host taxa. Specifically, we test the hypotheses that: i) the MRCA of Acacia thrips was contemporaneous with the MRCA of Acacia (rapid colonisation); ii) the MRCA of Acacia thrips postdates the origin of the MRCA of Acacia (delayed colonisation); or iii) predates the MRCA of Acacia (convergent colonisation and extinction). We interpret the results in terms of distinguishing between colonisation of Acacia, the evolution of host conservatism, and the evolution of ecological specialisation amongst thrips lineages with a focus on galling behaviour.

We inferred phylogenies using parsimony-based and probabilistic approaches to evaluate uncertainty in topology, test deviations from taxonomic classifications, and generate a distribution of phylograms to be used in divergence time estimation (see below). The reliability of the inferences between independent Bayesian analyses was evaluated using the standard deviation of split frequencies that was below 0.01 on all runs. The potential scale reduction factor (PSRF) ranged from 1.000 to 1.012 for all parameters in the separate 100 × 10 6 generations indicating consistent posterior parameters among runs. The Bayesian consensus tree indicated several poorly supported deeper nodes, but otherwise resolved the section clades ( Figure 2 ). Our consensus tree showed good general agreement with section classifications [33] . The topologies of the parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian inferences all indicated very similar polyphyletic groupings of species from all four sections (Additional file 1, Additional file 2, Additional file 3, Additional file 4, Additional file 5 and Additional file 6). The SH-test for section monophyly indicated that 100 ML constraint trees generated using maximum liklehood were all significantly worse (P < 0.0001) than the topology of the Bayesian consensus phylogeny.
Considered together, species of sections Phyllodineae and Juliflorae cluster within the Plurinerves as do Plurinerves within the Juliflorae. Acacia colletioides (Plurinerves) groups within a clade that is otherwise comprised of section Botrycephalae. Section Botrycephalae is a derived clade of section Phyllodineae. Acacia elata and A. terminalis are paraphyletic with other Botrycephalae in section Phyllodineae. These topological associations are well supported in our Bayesian inference ( Figure 2 ) and all other inferences (Additional file 4 and Additional file 5). Acacia brachystachya (Juliflorae) is well supported within section Phyllodineae in all inferences. Within Juliflorae, A. stenophylla (Plurinerves) is a well-supported sister-species of A. xiphophylla in all inferences. Acacia heteroclita and A. confluens (Plurinerves) also consistently grouped within the Juliflorae. Our inferences also show that section Plurinerves comprises A. verniciflua, A. howittii, A. aspera, A. flexifolia, A. lineata, A. genistifolia, and A. montana, which have all been classified as Phyllodineae species. These relationships were well-supported in the probabilistic inferences. Acacia verticilata (Juliflorae) grouped within the Plurinerves clade. Lineages that were not well resolved included A. cuthbersonii, A. coriacea, A. masliniana and A. havilandiorum, and the clade comprising A. floribunda, A. mucronata, A. longifolia, A. orites, and A. triptera.
Inferences of Acacia thrips phylogeny were undertaken using the same procedure as for Acacia. The standard deviation of split frequencies was below 0.01 on all runs. The potential scale reduction factor (PSRF) was 1.000 for all parameters in the 100 × 10 6 generations runs. The Figure 2 Bayesian consensus tree of Acacia. The consensus was derived from sampling every 1000 th tree of 100 × 10 6 iterations with 2 chains and a GTR+I+Γ model applied to each gene locus and a burnin using 75,000 trees of a 100,000 tree posterior sample. Posterior probabilities > 0.90 are shown above branches. Red dots at branch terminals indicate host species. Taxon colour refers to Acacia sections: Plurinerves (blue); Juliflorae (green); Phyllodineae (black); and Botrycephalae (red).
Bayesian consensus tree was largely concordant with that of previous work [32] and with our parsimony and likelihood inferences (Additional file 1, Additional file 2 and Additional file 3). An important difference in our topology arises due to the uncertain placement of Kladothrips antennatus in respect to the clade containing Kladothrips zygus. Previous phylogenetic inference [35] also shows poor support for this relationship despite more thorough testing of topology.
We inferred divergence time estimates using Bayesian and penalised likelihood (PL) approaches. The null molecular clock hypothesis of equal evolutionary rates was rejected (P < 0.0001). The estimated sample size (ESS) performance criteria (> 1000) indicated sufficient posterior parameter sampling. A total of n = 28 × 10 3 Acacia phylograms were filtered according to the topological constraint inferred with MrBayes. Of these, n = 25 Acacia PL chronograms were identical to the constraint. As this sample was not sufficient (age estimates not normally distributed) to calculate confidence intervals, we used the geometric mean to summarise the ranges of node age estimates inferred using PL. The dates of the parallel divergence inferred from the Bayesian approach and the geometric mean of the chronograms inferred using PL were 5.6 and 7.4 millions of years, respectively.
We inferred timing estimates of Acacia thrips to generate and test relative divergence timing hypotheses (see below). The null molecular clock hypothesis was rejected (P < 0.0001). The ESS performance criteria (> 1000) indicated sufficient posterior parameter sampling. A total of n = 28 × 10 3 Acacia thrips phylograms were filtered according to a topological constraint inferred with MrBayes. Of these n = 10 were identical to the constraint. After scaling node ages, the dates for the MRCA of Acacia thrips were 14.38 mya under the Bayesian consensus, and 25.32 mya as the geometric mean calculated from the PL inferences.
The range of divergence timing estimates represented in our BEAST and r8s inferences were summarised as divergence timing models ( Table 1 ). The assumption of co-cladogenesis, contemporaneous MRCA's at 20 Mya, and the maximal r8s estimate of approximately 50 million years for the MRCA were also tested. Bayes factor testing ( Table 2) between divergence timing models using stepping-stone sampling of the log marginal likelihoods among our three hypotheses for the MRCA of Acacia thrips were: ln(H 14 
Our findings indicate that the common ancestor of Acacia thrips postdates the common ancestor of Acacia. Putative absolute estimates of divergence timing indicate that thrips included Acacia in their host range approximately 14 Mya. We detected phylogenetic under-dispersion in host-species use that is consistent with i) cycles of oligophagy or polyphagy interspersed with repeated colonisations of Acacia over protracted periods before the evolution of resource specialisation; and ii) colonisation of host phenotypes that favour resource use in one environment over the other. Opportunistic and domicile-building thrips are polyphyletic groups whose common ancestors appeared Date priors for the common ancestor of Acacia thrips and a parallel divergence event used to calibrate the thrips phylogeny. Path and stepping-stone sampling were used to estimate marginal likelihoods of each the divergence timing model for Bayes factor tests. A split in the thrips and Acacia phylogenies was treated as fixed [89] .
between 5 and 10 Mya. The galling genus Kladothrips arose as recently as 6 Mya and represents the least uncertain shift to more stringent host-specificity by thrips and specialisation solely on Acacia. The common ancestors of the kleptoparasitic genus Koptothrips, and the gallers on whom they specialise, arose at approximately the same time. The putative date for the origin of the galling clade is of particular interest because several hypotheses posited for adopting this life history strategy can now be contextualised with the evolution of the Australian environment.
By definition, colonisation and the change to include a new species implies a broadening of host range and a period of oligophagy. Our ultrametric inference (Figure 3 ) for the transition between oligophagy (or polyphagy) at colonisation and host conservatism on Acacia, is explainable in several ways: i) oligophagy or polyphagy persisted for considerable evolutionary time after colonisation and before host conservatism on Acacia and the evolution of specialised behaviour; ii) host conservatism on Acacia evolved during or shortly after the colonisation of Acacia and specialised behaviour considerably later; or iii) host-conservatism at macro-evolutionary scales has obscured patterns of recolonisations of Acacia occurring at micro-evolutionary scales. Given the estimate for the origin of Acacia at 20 Mya, our results ( Figure 3) indicate that the earliest possible transition to host conservatism on Acacia by thrips occurred at approximately 14 Mya. Uncertainty in our node estimates does not exclude earlier colonisation at 16.5 Mya. Thrips colonised Acacia a considerable period after the host lineage radiated. Recolonisations might be expected to occur after initial contact with Acacia if there was an extended period before resource specialisation, and where host ranges include several plant taxa [20, 36, 37] . The ability to colonise a phylogenetically wider range of potential hosts is consistent with oligophagy and the relatively rapid colonisation of the Juliflorae, Plurinerves, and Phyllodineae (Figure 3 ). Ancestor lineages of these host sections existed before the MRCA of the gallers. This suggests host switching among distantly related species was initially accompanied by high species-specificity (e.g. [38] ). There appears to be a protracted period before specialised behaviour evolved between thrips lineages and with Acacia. The 5 million year lag between the MRCA of the gallers and their divergence from the other genera is a relatively deep split. Primary and secondary associations with Acacia appear to be derived. Therefore, it is plausible that ancestors of extant species recolonised Acacia numerous times subsequent to the evolution of host conservatism on Acacia.
Conservative associations between an insect and host plant clade have been estimated at periods from 3 Mya (psyllids, [9] ), 20 Mya (gallwasps, [39] ), 40 Mya (yucca moths, [40] ), to sometime since the Cretaceous (fig wasps,  [16] ). The two former studies of parasitic associations reported delayed colonisation of the host. The latter two associations infer co-cladogenesis with rapid colonisation scenarios and involve pollination mutualisms. Mutualisms are expected to select for more specific host conservatism due to the pollinator habit [41] . By comparison, parasitisms having relatively high species-specificity have been shown to involve switching between more distantly related plants [42] . Generally, host-range limits vary between antagonistic associations compared to symbioses and mutualisms where narrower species-to-species dependencies are more common [43] [44] [45] . Parasites of the galling habit exhibit wider host ranges than that of the prey species and evolve host-plant conservatism as a secondary association [46, 47] . Kleptoparasitic and opportunist thrips have evolved associations with Acacia as secondary hosts presumably by targeting domiciles of other thrips species. Ecological specialisation amongst Acacia thrips characterized by primary and secondary associations predict forces selecting for host-plant conservatism will vary among the Acacia thrips as do their host-plant ranges.
Host conservatism is transitory as diet breadths of phytophagous insects fluctuate over time [8, 24, [48] [49] [50] . Thrips with strict host plant associations are rare, exhibit a willingness to engage in feeding on a wide variety of plant families, and have similar feeding apparatus in all life stages [51] . This suggests plasticity in host plant tolerance is possibly linked to secondary associations with food resources that have been used in the evolutionary past [48, 52, 53] and facilitated cycles of recolonisation. Gall-inducing thrips, apart from those on Acacia, are able to exploit multiple plant taxa [25] . This suggests host choice by thrips involves multiple evolutionarily labile traits. For example, galling by sawflies has arisen independently on multiple occasions across five plant families [54] . The nematine subfamily of sawflies that specialises on the genus Salix also has several origins of galling, but on various parts of the plant [55] . Therefore, trade-offs between plesiotypic trait compatibility among available plants [19] and selection for traits resulting in host conservatism, should strongly favour thrips associations with Acacia. In other words, a broad diet breadth facilitates colonisation of new plant lineages, but selection for host conservatism develops when genetic trade-offs in performance arise on the new host.
Shifting to a new host plant can result from trade-offs between alternative environments associated with natural enemies [56, 57] and larval or oviposition performance on alternative hosts [58] [59] [60] [61] . Thrips colonised Acacia at a time when it presumably supported a similar diversity of insects as it does today [62] . As a result, thrips likely experienced fitness costs associated with predation or competition during colonisation. Furthermore, host conservatism and ecological specialisation expressed by contemporary thrips species appears to have taken several millions of years to evolve as Australia experienced pronounced environmental change and ecological disruption. Our estimates suggest that the common ancestors of the thrips behavioural suites arose approximately at the beginning of the Quaternary when Australia's climate was strongly linked to glacial/interglacial cycling [63] . Before this period, Australia experienced a more general transition from humid to seasonal climates. The development of arid environments resulted in profound structural changes to animal and plant communities [64, 65] including Acacia [66, 67] . Performance between host lineages has been shown to respond to such habitat gradients [15, 68] . Our timeline for the colonisation of Acacia coincides with the first major step towards aridity during the mid-Miocene and the development of a more acute dry season in Central Australia [63] . It is at this time that Acacia replaced Eucalyptus in the developing arid regions. Acacia represented an expanding resource with geographical range changes that potentially influenced host resource suitability and predictability. Host conservatism evolved under transient abiotic and biotic conditions in a non-random manner during the diversification of Acacia thrips. Our inferences indicate that the phylogenetic distribution of Acacia host-species compared to non-hosts is non-random. For example, one or several species of Acacia in crown clades that support thrips have intermixed lineages that are absent of thrips parasitism. This form of phylogenetic under-dispersion, where host lineages are distantly related and intermixed among terminal branches, is characteristic of recolonisation episodes [23, 24, 48] . We suggest these patterns are robust to our incomplete sample. Acacia thrips are a species poor group (ca. 235 spp., [32] ) compared to Acacia (> 1000 spp.). Single species of Acacia are known to support upto 5 thrips species, reducing the realised number of host species even further. Similarly, at a very broad taxonomic scale, thrips radiations on several plant families have occurred with noticeable absences from others. Thrips are associated with several angiosperm families including species of Ficus (Moraceae), Geijera parviflora (Rutaceae), and Casuarina (Casuarinaceae) as well as genera specific to mosses, conifers, and cycads [30, 69, 70] . Plant families with very few or no specific patterns of affiliation with thrips include Myrtaceae, Proteaceae, Asteraceae, Leguminosae, and Poaceae. The latter two families have a remarkable diversity of thrips species attracted to flowers and leaves respectively, but with no perceivable pattern of affiliation. We propose that these phylogenetic patterns of under-dispersion are indicative of host conservatism driven by biotic and abiotic environmental compatibilities subsequent to delayed colonisation.
Thrips lineages associated with phylogenetically isolated host species suggests geographic range characteristics of non-host sister-taxa are not suited to supporting Acacia thrips [71] . Acacia have typical geographical range distributions with most species having small and intermediate range sizes and few with large distributions. The size of the host species geographic distribution appears independent of extant thrips associations, but might not be indicative of ancestral ranges during colonisation. For example, A. oswaldii is a broadly distributed arid-zone species inhabited by galling and kleptoparasitic thrips species. Acacia oswaldii is phylogenetically distinct from sister-taxa that are not parasitised by thrips (Additional file 6) suggesting this host has geographic range characteristics suited to the maintenance of Acacia thrips populations while sisterspecies do not. Acacia cuthbersonii, A. carneorum, and A. pickardii are also phylogenetically isolated, but these species have broad as well as very narrow geographic range distributions among them. Phylogenetically isolated clades supporting thrips that include A. triptera, A. kempeana, A. aneura, A. citrinoviridis, and A. xiphophylla also have species with broad and narrow geographic distributions, suggesting historical factors are important to maintenance of Acacia thrips populations. The Acacia lineage possessing both species with phyllodes (section Phyllodineae) as well as those with bipinnate leaves (section Botrycephalae) are all presumably unsuitable for thrips inhabitation due to geographic range characteristics, biotic associations, or heritable traits. Phyllodinous Acacia are phylogenetically and chemically related to bipinnate forms [72] [73] [74] , providing some basis for the presence of heritable traits partly explaining thrips absence in this stem clade (but see below). We suggest these patterns are consistent with host conservatism among genetically similar and dissimilar hosts with heritable and nonheritable characteristics favouring host use.
Host conservatism and host specialisation can be differentiated as the evolutionary conservative association of thrips and Acacia, and the evolution of distinct phenotypes that emerge directly or indirectly as a result of host conservatism [2] . Acacia thrips exhibit diverse phenotypes that characterise distinct forms of host specialisation that appear to have evolved in a cumulative manner on particular Acacia-related traits. Selection pressures and new ecological opportunities for specialisation arising during the course of climate transition should be dependent on stochastic and plesiotypic factors. Our timeline for the origins of Acacia thrips genera suggests the evolution of ecological specialisation was approximately contemporaneous, occurring midway between the common ancestor and the present. Once the inclusion of a novel host-plant in the dietary range of an insect occurs, conservative interactions conceivably select for traits such as gall induction [75] . Our findings show corresponding origins of domicile-building and kleptoparasitic thrips genera that are consistent with previous work [76] . It was suggested that gall-inducing was a selective response to kleptoparasitism. The observation that facultative kleptoparasitsm is present in some species of Koptothrips suggests an intermediate stage of specialisation similar to opportunism that has responded to selection on habitat. These observations make it difficult to determine whether behavioural specialisation by kleptoparasitic lineages on the domicile-building and gall-inducing thrips evolved as a consequence of either biotic or abiotic pressures.
Abiotic forces have a strong influence over trade-offs between heritable and non-heritable constraints on host use [15] . The physical environment and spatial context of hosts has been shown to structure insect communities [77, 78] . For instance, the impetus for galling behaviour is believed to include non-mutually exclusive factors associated with avoidance of natural enemies [79] , minimising environmental stress [80] , or optimising nutritional choices [81] . Galling arose in Kladothrips near the Miocene-Quaternary boundary. Pronounced ecological transitions during the Quaternary would have changed the selective landscape in Australia. Evidence of non-random host associations such as phylogenetic under-dispersion is also indicative of specialised behaviour as a response to habitat and resource selection [77] . This type of hostplant conservatism suggests colonisation of phenotypes that favour host-use in one environment over the other (e.g. [82] ). For instance, the evolution of galling is believed to be favoured in harsh xeric environments [83] that became particularly pronounced in Australia during the Quaternary. However, Acacia thrips are more species rich and occupy more diverse ecological roles outside the arid biome. At the other climatic extreme, Acacia thrips are absent from hydric habitats in southeastern Australia [31, 84] . Social behaviour in Kladothrips arose with the evolution of a specialised defensive caste and is symptomatic of species distributed in non-arid areas. An alternative strategy exhibited by non-social Kladothrips species is the adoption of physogastry and extreme fecundity. This 'boom-or-bust' lifestyle tends to characterise arid-distributed species. These hypotheses remain untested. Behavioural differentiation between environments predicts that ecological specialisation under conditions alternating between xeric and mesic environments, was based on selection on behaviour and habitat specialisation.
A considerably younger Acacia thrips common ancestor compared to that of Acacia is consistent with colonisation of a lineage that has not been used as a host in its recent evolutionary past. Presumably either oligophagous or polyphagous ancestral thrips populations were able to feed on and recognise Acacia subsequent to the evolution of host conservatism. We propose that colonisation of Acacia was initially characterised by either oligophagy or polyphagy and subsequent recolonisations by a number of ancestral lineages. Colonisation of phenotypically and environmentally suitable lineages occurred over a protracted period that resulted in phylogenetically underdispersed pattern of host conservatism. The evolution of host conservatism on suitable Acacia lineages facilitated the evolution of ecological specialisation during a period that coincided with aridification and ecological disturbance in Australia. Our findings support the hypothesis that host conservatism is a process shaped by changing abiotic and biotic forces, and ecological specialisation an additive process imposed by changing selective pressures on habitat preference and behaviour.

We inferred Acacia and thrips phylogenies using parsimony and probabilistic approaches to assess topological support for both thrips and Acacia datasets and to generate a distribution of phylograms to be used in divergence time estimation (see below). Four plastid loci (matK, rpl32-trnL intergenic spacer, psbA-trnH intergenic spacer, and trnL-F intron and intergenic spacer) and two nuclear loci from internal and external transcribed spacers (ITS and ETS respectively) of Acacia were sequenced. Previous work [85] has inferred several smaller trees that included multiple exemplars of some species used in this study. Primers and PCR protocols are described in a previous study [86] . We combined new sequence data with single representatives of species from the previous study and added 61 new species that included all Acacia that thrips are known to specialise on. Together our sample comprised 125 (12.6%) described species and two outgroup taxa. We used Paraserianthes lophantha [87] , the sister taxon of Acacia, and Parachidendron pruionsum [85] as outgroup taxa.
Probabilistic and parsimony inferences were conducted in MrBayes v.3.2.1 [88] , RAxML v.7.3.0 [89] , and MEGA5 v.5.05 [90] . We used jModelTest v.2.1.1 [91] to justify priors for models of sequence evolution that were selected according to the Akaike and the Bayesian Information Criteria (AIC & BIC; [92] ). The best-fit model selected by the AIC or BIC test for each of the plastid and nuclear plant often differed (Additional file 7: Table S1 ). Most of these models could not be specified in the divergence time estimation approaches, so we applied the general time reversible (GTR) model that generates distributions of parameters that approximate sub-models of the GTR model [93] . For the MrBayes and RAxML approaches, we fitted separate model priors (GTR with a proportion of invariant sites (I) and gamma (Γ) distributed rates) to each of the plastid and nuclear loci. Each Bayesian inference was performed over two simultaneous analyses with two Markov chains. Analyses were run four times to verify the repeatability of the phylogenetic inference; two runs at 100 × 10 6 and two at 40 × 10 6 generations. Posterior probabilities were derived from 75,000 trees sampled from post-burnin generations 25-100 million, after the chains had reached apparent stationarity. Convergence was assessed using the MCMC Tracer Analysis Tool v.1.5 [94] by plotting the log likelihoods to assess the point in the chain where stable values were reached. For the likelihood analyses conducted with RAxML, we implemented the rapid bootstrap analysis and search for the best-scoring tree using 1 × 10 4 runs. Our parsimony analyses conducted with MEGA5 were implemented using the Close-Neighbor-Interchange (CNI) method with random starting tree and 1 × 10 3 bootstrap replicates. Current phylogenetic relationships of Australian Acacia are not consistent with past classifications [85, 86] . In our data, Acacia diphylla is a synonym of Acacia blakei subsp. diphylla (Section Juliflorae). Although recent revisions have placed older classifications into doubt, we used the commonly used taxonomic ranking of Pedley. Four main clades including sections Plurinerves, Juliflorae, Botrycephalae, and Phyllodineae [33] were considered in this study. We used the SH-test [95] as implemented in RAxML, to assess the section classifications presented in Maslin (2004) against our consensus trees. We specified a constraint tree that grouped each section as a multifurcating clade using Mesquite v.2.75 [96] . The constraint tree consisted of three polytomous crown clades each grouping the section classifications Juliflorae, Plurinerves, and Botrycephalae, and a fourth stem clade as the Phyllodineae. We used RAxML to resolve the multifurcations and optimise the topology under maximum likelihood given the sequence alignment and gene partitions. The test used 100 runs (generates 100 ML trees) and the GTR+I+Γ substitution model. Each of the resulting 100 bifurcating topologies were compared with our consensus using the SH test (Figure 4 ).
The sole dependence of extant species of Acacia thrips on Acacia might be taken as evidence for the common ancestor sharing this attribute. However, without fossil material this is difficult to test and might not be the case given the difficulty in accurately estimating ancestral hostranges. Previous work [32] inferred an Acacia thrips phylogeny using most of the data presented here. The classification of the galling species has since been revised. Three genera comprising the galling species have been collapsed into the genus Kladothrips. We have added new samples of the galling species. Furthermore, the Kladothrips rugosus species complex previously believed to be an oligophagous group, are now considered separate monophagous species. Species delimitation using molecular approaches has been conducted in previous work [97] and demonstrates genetic divergence thresholds between these lineages are characteristic of separate species. As such, species of this clade are undescribed and have been designated by their host species association. Sequence data of cytochrome oxidase one (COI) mitochondrial DNA, and nuclear loci elongation factor one alpha (EF-1α) and wingless gene fragments [98] were used to reconstruct a thrips phylogeny. Full details describing primers, PCR conditions, sequencing, alignment, and substitution model priors can be found in [96] . The outgroup taxon Gynaikothrips specialises as a leaf-galler on the genus Ficus [70] and was chosen based on previous work [32] .
The same phylogenetic and model testing approaches conducted with the Acacia sequence data was repeated using the thrips data. For the MrBayes and RAxML approaches, we fitted separate model GTR+I+Γ to the 1 st , 2 nd , and 3 rd codon positions of COI and single partitions of EF-1α and wingless. The thrips Bayesian inferences were performed using four Markov chains. The same protocols for assessing repeatability and stationarity of Acacia inferences were applied.
We tested whether our Acacia consensus tree obeyed a molecular clock hypothesis using MEGA5 by comparing the ML value for our topologies with and without the molecular clock constraints using the GTR+I+Γ model of evolution. Ultrametric trees were inferred using PL as conducted in r8s v.1.8 [99] and a Bayesian approach conducted in BEAST v.1.7.2 [100] . Date calibrations were based on the most recent divergence timing estimates [101] with the MRCA of Acacia (sensu stricto) at between 14.6 and 21.2 Mya. We used a putative date of 20 million years before present as a fixed calibration for the origin of Acacia. This calibration prior was fixed to facilitate testing the relative timing between the two clades. Absolute divergence dates based on previous estimates are assumed to broadly contextualise Acacia divergence timing with changes in the Australian environment. A macrofossil of an extant species Acacia melanoxylon identified from the Pliocene [27] enabled us to compare our inferred dates with that of the fossil record.
Maximum clade credibility trees were inferred using BEAST. The model of evolution used to infer divergence time estimates was based on the priors implemented in the MrBayes inference across the locus partitions: GTR+ I+Γ, four gamma categories, and empirical base frequencies. The chain was run for 100 × 106 generations and sampled every 1000 th generation and the last 75,000 trees used for inferring ultrametric consensus trees and 95% highest posterior density intervals. We conducted several pilot runs using different priors on gene partitioning, topology constraints, and parameter distributions to estimate clock rates to use as priors in the dedicated runs in order to meet the posterior ESS optimisation criteria. We used the lognormal relaxed clock (with 'estimate rate') for the gene partitions and a normal distribution prior for the 'ucld.mean' for all partitions. The Yule process was used as the speciation model with a starting ultrametric tree topology constraint from a pilot BEAST inference that used a PL tree generated with r8s. Substitution and clock models were set to unlinked across gene partitions, and linked for tree priors. We used date priors only for those topology constraints necessary to define an ingroup and to calibrate the tree for the ultrametric hypothesis comparisons tested using path and stepping-stone sampling methods (see below). The 'stem' function was activated and clades assumed to be monophyletic. The r8s PL approach uses a data-driven crossvalidation procedure to select an appropriate level of rate smoothing given branch length estimates proportional to substitution differences.
Divergence time estimates for the Acacia thrips were inferred using a nominal root age of 1. As no reliable date calibration prior for the origin of the most recent common ancestor of Acacia thrips was available, we preferred to scale the thrips trees in respect to the date of a parallel Figure 4 Divergence timing of Acacia. An ultrametric comparison between Acacia (above) and thrips (below). Acacia tree is abbreviated and colour branches indicate host sections Plurinerves (blue), Juliflorae (green), Phyllodineae (black), and Botrycephalae (grey). Time scale in millions of years is based on molecular dating [103] . Horizontal bars on nodes indicate the 95% highest posterior density intervals. Red dashed lines indicate the calibration model priors used for the thrips inference. Behavioural categories of thrips indicated on the right. The yellow dot indicates the node when the inferred parallel divergence occurred. divergence event [98] and our Acacia ultrametric trees generated by BEAST and r8s (see below). Although the parallel divergence was our only reliable date prior, the use of a single, derived calibration can produce spurious root-node age estimates. The Yule process was used as the speciation model with a starting ultrametric tree topology constraint from a pilot BEAST inference that used default priors. Otherwise, the same procedures used to estimate Acacia divergence timing were implemented with the thrips data.
We used a bifurcation in both the Acacia and thrips clades that is an inferred point of parallel diversification, and therefore temporarily concordant, to estimate the relative timing between clades. To test whether the MRCA of Acacia thrips was contemporaneous with, pre-, or post-dated the MRCA of Acacia we compared ultrametric tree inferences using the various date priors estimated for their MRCA's and the parallel divergence. All posterior trees from our thrips and Acacia MrBayes runs were filtered using a consensus topology constraint conducted in PAUP* v.4b10 [102] , and divergence times estimated from these phylograms using r8s. Dates for the parallel bifurcations of respective social and non-social thrips clades parasitising the same sister host-clades [98] were used to scale the Acacia thrips chronograms to estimate the date of the MRCA. The parallel diversification of Acacia thrips on the stem clade comprising A. cambagei and A. harpophylla and species in the sister-clade was used as a date prior to match with the divergence date of these hosts in the Acacia chronograms. The divergence timing estimates generated from BEAST and r8s provided a maximum and minimum date priors for the origin of the MRCA of Acacia thrips in respect to the MRCA of Acacia. We tested these timing hypotheses as well as the assumption of co-cladogenesis ( Table 2 ). The different divergence timing models were compared using Bayes factors (BF) by estimating marginal likelihoods using path sampling and stepping-stone sampling conducted in BEAST [103, 104] . In terms of the relative strength of the model, the ln(BF) (natural log) indicates: strong (2.3-3.4), very strong (3.4-4.6), and decisive (> 4.6 ) evidence [105] .
Few gynecologists would argue against that nuclear atypicality and glandular complexity in endometrial hyperplasia are associated with an increased risk of endometrial cancer [1, 2] . Moreover, the possible existence of occult endometrial carcinoma or the risk of progression to carcinoma in complex or atypical endometrial hyperplasia has been a rationale to offer invasive surgery when a patient was found to have these histologic features [1] . Interestingly, a recent longterm observational study reported that the progression to carcinoma was observed in only 1.9% for non-atypical endometrial hyperplasia after 4 years follow-up [3] . The data reassure us that the risk of progression to carcinoma including coexistence of carcinoma may be negligible when no atypia was found. Also this low rate supports nonsurgical management of non-atypical endometrial hyperplasia. However, in cases with atypia, things go different. For atypical hyperplasia, the 4-year cumulative risk increased to 8.2%. After 9 years, the cumulative progression risk further increased to 12.4%. Should we offer decisive hysterectomy in all patients with atypia? Is there any room for individualized management in patients with atypical endometrial hyperplasia?
In this issue of Journal of Gynecologic Oncology, an observational study from the Taiwanese Gynecologic Oncology Group (TGOG) provided several risk factors that we should take into consideration in planning treatment of endometrial hyperplasia. First, the authors confirmed that several clinical variables, such as older age, menopausal status, history of diabetes, history of abnormal uterine bleeding, and high body mass index (BMI) were independent risk factors. Second, they tried to improve the accuracy in the prediction of coexisting carcinoma using these clinical risk factors. Did they success in improving the accuracy of the model? Unfortunately, it seems not. When the authors integrated atypia with other clinical risk factors, the discrimination performance did not increased significantly. Thus, it may not be surprising that the authors emphasized no risk factors but only atypia in the conclusion. Then, what would be the scientific merit of this multi-center study?
First, in the authors' data, positive likelihood ratios were high when a patient with atypical endometrial hyperplasia had high BMI or in her menopause. Especially, when a patient with atypical hyperplasia was in her menopause, a positive likelihood ratio was increased to more than 5.0. This indicates the presence of risk factors other than atypia, such as high BMI or menopause, may represent high likelihood of coexisting carcinoma. Therefore, if we find that a patient with atypical hyperplasia has other risk factors, especially menopause, a pathologist should examine the specimen more carefully, and a surgeon should offer adequate information to a patient and allow her to choose decisive treatment. Because the authors used logistic modeling, it is evident that the probability of coexisting carcinoma would increase further if a patient has additional risk factors.
Second, it is surprising that 25 out of 191 patients (13%) with non-atypical endometrial hyperplasia were found to have coexisting carcinoma. In general, it has been believed that the risk of progression to carcinoma is less than 4% in non-atypical hyperplasia [2] . Correspondingly, a recent large- 2 www.ejgo.org scale study showed that cumulative progression risk was only 1.9% through 9 years of observation in patients with nonatypical hyperplasia [3] . In contrast to previous knowledge, the TGOG report alerts that substantial proportion of patients with non-atypical hyperplasia has coexisting carcinoma. If the results from TGOG were not affected from serious selection bias, the results suggest that coexisting carcinoma may not have a significant role in the clinical progression to carcinoma in non-atypical hyperplasia. However, we should remember that the natural history of endometrial hyperplasia is difficult to define because of the unstable reproducibility of pathologic examination or the diversity in sampling methods. Therefore, it may be immature to interpret the TGOG data as a recommendation for aggressive treatment in non-atypical hyperplasia. Rather, despite the incidence rate of coexisting carcinoma, hormone treatment should be recommended first based on its excellent outcome in the patients with nonatypical hyperplasia [4, 5] .
Although the TGOG data did not provide a decisive prediction model to help an individualized treatment in atypical endometrial hyperplasia, I believe that gynecologic oncologists should keep trying to find an efficient risk model for these patients. Above all, more effort should be directed toward the estimation of clinical effectiveness of hormone treatment in atypical endometrial hyperplasia, because majority of these patients are subjected to aggressive surgical treatment. Considering its low progression rate and good response rate to hormonal therapy, the role of hormonal treatment should be explored as an ideal treatment option regardless of women' s desire for fertility. To establish an individualized treatment in these patients, Asian society should continue to communicate and collaborate further.
Intestinal parasites are a diverse group of organisms that include single-celled protozoans and multi-cellular intestinal helminths that affect the gastro-intestinal tract of humans and other animals [1] . Soil-transmitted helminthiasis is caused primarily by four species of nematodes, i.e. Ascaris lumbricoides (roundworm), Trichuris trichiura (whipworm), and Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator americanus (hookworms) that parasitize human gastrointestinal tract [2] . These major human soiltransmitted helminths (STH) have significant impact on human health in many parts of the world, particularly in developing countries [3] . If not treated early and efficacious, they may lead to malnutrition, chronic diarrhea, anemia, and other public health problems that can impair physical and intellectual development in children [4] [5] [6] .
Currently, four drugs are recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) for STH: MEB, ALB, levamisole and pyrantel pamoate [7, 8] . MEB and ALB are increasingly deployed in mass drug administration programs [8] which require a single drug administration to all subjects without prior diagnosis or checking for contra-indications. For this reason, the two benzimidazole 2-carbamates MEB and ALB (chemical structures presented in S1 Supporting information) are preferred over levamisole and pyrantel pamoate, which require weight-based dosing and which are also intrinsically less potent.
Literature reports indicate that TNZ, a 5-nitroimidazole compound (S1-1 Supporting information), also has some anthelmintic efficacy [9] , although it is therapeutically mainly used against protozoan infections and infections caused by anaerobic bacteria in humans. As such TNZ is often used by the same patients treated with STH drugs [10, 11] .
Effective treatment and prevention strategies for these neglected tropical diseases can be delivered cheaply, but reports of treatment failure are frequent in developing countries most likely because of poor quality medicines, which includes spurious/falsely labeled/ falsified/counterfeit (SFFC) medicines, chemical and/or physicochemical instability, inappropriate storage and transport, and poor quality control during manufacturing and importing medicines [12] . SFFC medicines are medicines that are deliberately and fraudulently mislabeled with respect to identity and/or source and include products with the correct ingredients or with wrong ingredients, without active ingredients, with insufficient or too much active ingredient, or with fake packaging [13] . Substandard medicines, i.e. not having the appropriate quality (which is expected to be equivalent to the regulatory quality), may be SFFC but also approved medicines. In a quality survey in Nigeria, 48% of the samples of different categories of medicines were found to be outside the British Pharmacopoeia (BP) limits for active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) assay. Some medicines were even lacking the active ingredient [14] . The use of substandard medicines may result in therapeutic failure, resistance development, and occurrence of serious adverse events or even death due to excessive dose or the presence of toxic impurities [15] [16] [17] . A study conducted in sub-Saharan Africa in 2010 on the quality of selected anti-malarial medicines reported 64% overall quality failure in Nigeria, from which one artemisinin-based anti-malarial drug sample did not contain any of artemether API [18] .
The presence of substandard and SFFC medicines not only poses threats to the individual users in terms of the health and side effects experienced, but also to the public and government in terms of trade relations and economic implications [19] . Hence, like many other public health problems, the issue of the presence of these substandard and SFFC medicines for public consumption should receive careful attention in developing countries [16] .
Finished pharmaceutical products (FPPs) are tested for quality by assessing whether they meet pharmacopoeial or any other approved specifications. If not, they are discarded as nonconforming. This is a dichotomous decision without differentiation of the seriousness of failure and/or importance of quality attributes towards clinical use for the patient [20] . The evaluation of quality of any product poses thus a common problem due to a multiplicity of measures which must be balanced one against the other. Even when the quality attributes are precisely measurable, a serious challenge exists in combining the individual measurements into one index representing the total quality [21] . Such balance problems can be solved by using a Derringer's desirability function [22] .
In general, this study was carried out to assess the pharmacopoeial quality of three medicines (MEB, ALB and TNZ) circulating in Ethiopia. The quality in terms of quality attributes like assay/content, dosage uniformity, dissolution, disintegration and friability was evaluated. The criticality of the quality attributes was assessed using FMEA risk-based analysis and Derringer's desirability function was applied to obtain one global quality index for each sample investigated.

MEB USP working standard [Cadila Pharmaceuticals (Ethiopia)], ALB reference standard [Greenfield Pharmaceuticals (China)] and TNZ reference standard [Greenfield Pharmaceuticals (China)] were kindly donated from Food, Medicine and Health-care Administration and Control Authority (FMHACA) of Ethiopia and used as received. Purified ultra pure water was obtained by water purification system (Thermofischer Scientific, USA, 18.2 MV.cm at 25uC). All other chemicals used in this study were analytical grade and used as received.
The sampling strategy was defined following the Medicine Quality Assessment Reporting Guidelines (MEDQUARG) as proposed by Newton PN et al., 2009 [23] based on the questions: ''Are there medicines of poor quality in the formal distribution outlets in Ethiopia? If there are, what is the prevalence of these poor quality medicines?'' Moreover, since there is a possible influence of origin and distribution conditions on medicines quality as received by the patient, we included the different formal outlets that are in practice used by patients in Ethiopia. So, we also looked at the following question: ''Is there a difference in quality of medicines (1) among the different levels of medicines outlets? (2) across different geographic areas of the country? (3) among the two national economies: government and privately owned medicines outlets and (4) among the different countries of origin''. Therefore, in function of the questions, sampling units were defined to be the medicines sold from the drug retail outlets of the formal supply chain in the country, the different levels of the supply chain system
Access to medicines of good quality improves the chances of successful treatment for individual patients and promotes better outcomes for public health in general. At present, the prevailing strategy for improving access to medicines for neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) is drug donation programs. However, the presence of poor quality medicines in the market is a global threat on public health, especially in developing countries by critically risking efforts of treatment and control of diseases in general and the NTDs in particular. Conventionally, medicine quality has been ignored in NTDs, though scattered reports show that serious problems exist. Therefore, we assessed the quality of two commonly used anthelminthic drugs (MEB and ALB) and one antiprotozoal drug (TNZ) in Ethiopia. The analytical results were converted into conclusions using two systems: the traditional dichotomous pharmacopoeial specification-compliance based approach and the riskbased Taguchi quantitative desirability approach. Overall, the results showed high prevalence of poor quality of the three medicines, mainly determined by the country of origin. We conclude that risk-based regulatory quality control procedures should be based on identification of the most critical quality attribute and apply desirability functions to quantify and classify the quality of medicines.
in Ethiopia (drug stores incl. health centers, pharmacies incl. hospital pharmacies, wholesalers), the geographic areas, government/privately owned medicines outlets and country of origin.
Based on the sampling strategy, 106 drug samples were collected between January and March 2012 through multilevel stratified random sampling from all the levels of the supply chain system of the country (n = 3) covering all types of government and privately owned drug outlets (n = 2). All available drug samples of the three study medicines were collected from each of the selected drug outlet. Through proportional allocation to each stratum of the supply chain, 59.4% (n = 63) of the drug samples were collected from drug stores; 36.8% (n = 39) were from pharmacies while the remaining 3.8% (n = 4) samples were from wholesales. 17.9% (n = 7) of pharmacy collected drug samples were obtained from hospitals, while four of the drug samples collected from drug stores was from health centers. Depending on the geographic locations and drug markets, the samples were collected from 7 major cities of the country: Addis Ababa, Hawasa (and its region including Arbaminch and Shashemene), Jimma, Assosa (and its region including Nekemte), Adama, Mekele and Bahirdar; which represent all four directions starting from Addis Ababa, the major central commercial center. All samples were tablet formulations and purchased anonymously by mystery shoppers from local area who were trained before. The mystery shoppers stated, if needed, that they were a travelling five member family and the family head, a man of 35 years old, abruptly caught a stomach ache ('kurtet' in Amharic) due to worm infestations and requested the dispenser at the medicine outlet for some mebendazole (for 'kurtet') and albendazole tablets (for ascariasis) as he used both medicines from his past experiences. At the same time, the family's 18 years old son was suffering from diarrhea and thus requested the dispenser for any medicines which could be given for him describing that he was taking tinidazole tablets two months ago for similar symptoms. Since the travelling family was in a worry of coming up with shortage of the medicines while travelling they requested a sufficient quantity of tablets of the medicines.
The mystery shoppers were blinded about the purpose of the study and only instructed to purchase medicines in their original primary packaging as supplied by the manufacturer. For the purpose of this study, the relevant information of all collected samples was recorded on a standard form as soon as leaving the drug outlet and entered into database. The information included the level of the drug outlet, place/city of collection, name of the active pharmaceutical ingredient, the country of origin, manufacturing company, expiry date, manufacturing date, batch/lot number, and labeled dose (strength) of the active ingredient. Medicines purchased from a specific outlet, labeled with a specific generic name or brand name, strength, number of units per strip/ package, batch number, country of origin, manufacturing and expiry dates were considered as one sample. Since the mystery shoppers stated that they were a travelling five member family, they were able to buy enough units per sample. For MEB, 50 tablets per sample were purchased while for ALB and TNZ, a sample contained 100 tablets. The samples were stored at ambient temperature (20uC to 25uC) until tested, with a storage period of maximally 3 months before testing, and none of samples had expired at the time of testing.
The quality control laboratory tests were performed in Jimma University Laboratory of Drug Quality (JuLaDQ), Jimma, Ethiopia. JuLaDQ follows a quality system extended from its collaborating laboratory, Laboratory of Drug Quality and Registration (DruQuaR) of Ghent University, 9000-Ghent, Belgium.
The laboratory tests were carried out according to the general and individual monographs specified in different Pharmacopoeias, as indicated in S1-2 supporting information.
Instrument performance and system suitability tests were successfully performed for the analytical instruments and HPLC methods, respectively.
For any drug product, identification of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) is a critical quality attribute. The three drugs (ALB, MEB and TNZ) belong to biopharmaceutical classification system (BCS) class II, with low aqueous solubility and high permeability [24, 25] . Moreover, disintegration is an integral part of and/or pre-requisite for dissolution of immediate release dosage forms [26] .
Therefore, quality attributes based upon which the products were evaluated were defined to be identification, assay/content, dissolution, dosage uniformity, disintegration and friability tests. Quality failure was defined as a sample failing any single test of the aforementioned tests for which it was evaluated.
Details of the laboratory test methods used to evaluate the study medicines are presented in S1-3 supporting information.
Risk analysis is a general quality tool which has its roots in engineering [27] , but is now becoming a well-established tool in the pharmaceutical field as well. As such, ICH has devoted a separate guideline (Q9) to quality risk management, which is being embraced by pharmaceutical authorities [28] . Risk analysis, i.e. the estimation of the risk associated with the identified hazards, is an important part of this global risk management. Several quality risk management tools like FMEA (Failure Mode Effects Analysis) are available, as mentioned by ICH in Q9. Therefore, FMEA was used to evaluate the criticality of product quality attributes in this study. Criticality was evaluated using RPN, based on evaluations about the probability of occurrence of the failure (O), the severity of the failure (S) and the probability of not detecting the failure (D). These judgments are converted into numerical values using descriptive scales and finally combined in the RPN [29] by means of Equation (1):
Used scales for severity, occurrence and detectability of failure are presented in Tables 1 to 3 [30] . For severity ratings, five pharmaceutical experts in Belgium (4) and Ethiopia (1) (S1-4 supporting information) were assigned to score it and the median score was taken. For occurrence, literature was reviewed for the three products (MEB, ALB and TNZ) in Africa and for other drugs in Ethiopia as there was no previous quality study conducted for these three products in Ethiopia. In Nigeria, 48% of MEB samples contained amounts of active ingredient outside the appropriate assay limits [31] . Assay based pharmaceutical quality assessment in Kenya reported very poor quality for majority of marketed anthelmintic preparations [32] . Therefore, the highest occurrence score of 8 was assigned for assay. Studies conducted in Ethiopia indicated that the occurrence of failure of identification, disintegration and friability tests are very low making the scores assigned to each of these failures to be 1 [18, 33, 34] . Since 19.1% (8/42) of our MEB samples did not meet the pharmacopoeial acceptance criteria for dosage form uniformity, the probability of occurrence of this failure is moderately high and thus a score of 6 was assigned for its occurrence. For scoring the detectability, the scaling ranged from the low score assigned to the easiest detection to the highest score for the more difficult detection method. Friability can be detected through simple visual/weighing observation; hence, a score of 1 was assigned to its detectability. On the other hand, assay and dissolution studies involve quantitative tests, requiring fully equipped laboratory system and trained personnel. Therefore, detectability was scored to be 8 for each of these failure modes. Since identification requires field tests like color reactions and/or TLC, a score of 5 was assigned to detectability of identity failures.
Desirability function, just like risk analysis, is a quality tool first proposed by Harrington in 1965 for use in the optimization of quality of manufactured products. The approach has basic foundation in engineering [35, 36] and is widely adopted in the manufacturing industry.
The central idea of a desirability function is to create one ballmark figure. which is a composite number reflecting different response. This is done by mapping the value of each property/ response onto a unit-less score in the range from zero to one based on the appropriateness (or desirability) of the property/response. Therefore, Derringer's desirability function was applied for the assessment of the quality of the three pharmaceutical products (MEB, ALB and TNZ). The desirability function can be used to combine multiple responses into one response called the ''overall desirability function'' D, ranging between a value of 0 (one or more product characteristics are completely unacceptable) to 1 (all product characteristics are on target). This overall desirability function D is obtained from the geometric mean of the individual desirabilities (d i ) which provide a way to assess the quality of one property. The formula to calculate the overall D-value is presented in Equation 2:
In this equation, p i was the weight or relative importance assigned to the response. For this study, n equals 4 since four characteristics were considered in the global evaluation of ALB and TNZ, while n = 3 for MEB since dissolution study was not performed. The advantage of calculating the geometric mean is that when one of the criteria has an unacceptable value, the overall product will be unacceptable as well. The highest global desirability value represents the product with the highest quality.
Individual desirability functions were defined for each of the quality attributes, based on a psychophysical scale and the results obtained from the FMEA quality assessment. Desirability function possessing values in the range (0-1) classifies the conversion of the quantity value of a specific quality indicator into the assessment of Table 1 . Evaluation criteria and ranking system for the severity of effects. Table 2 . Evaluation criteria and ranking system for the occurrence of failure. the desirability (preference) of a certain condition of evaluated subject (pharmacopoeial quality of the three medicines). Among the specific ways to implement the desirability function for the corresponding estimation, a psychophysical scale of Harrington is chosen providing universal application. The scale served to establish the correspondence between physical and psychological parameters. All the numeric desirability values (0-1) of the measured parameters/quality attributes are regarded as physical parameters, while a purely subjective assessment of a researcher (e.g. excellent, good, acceptable, low, bad) to express degree of satisfaction are regarded as psychological parameters.
A rough estimation constructs a five-interval quality scale (Table 4 ) [37] . For assay and dissolution, a two-sided desirability function was used where it becomes zero at the lowest and upper limit. For identity and dosage form uniformity, a one-sided desirability function was used. Absence of API is assumed to be clinically completely undesirable and thus this point was assigned d = 0 where as 100%lc was assigned d = 1 (i.e. optimal desirability). Since the pharmacopoeial specification for assay is 90-110%lc for all the three products and the pychophysical Harrington's scale of quality specifies desirability range from about 0.7 to 1.0 to be good, d = 0.7 was assigned for assay values of 90 and 110%lc. Moreover, d = 0.3 was assigned for both 70% and 130%lc, while d = 0.01 was assigned to 50% and 150%lc. The individual desirability function for assay was then defined as different linear sections of different slopes in the range of 100%lc to 90%lc (slope = 0.03), 90%lc to 70%lc (slope = 0.02) and from 70%lc to 50%lc (slope = 0.01). Similar but negative slopes were used for assay values greater than 100%lc, mirroring the under-dosing profile.
For dissolution, %drug release was considered. According to USP acceptance criteria (S1-2 supporting information), ALB should release 80% within 30 minutes, while TNZ should release 75% within 120 minutes. However, BP sets acceptance criteria for both drugs at 70%. Therefore, d = 1 was assigned for 100% drug release, while d = 0.7 was assigned for the average 75% and 125% drug release for both ALB and TNZ. Moreover, d = 0.3 was assigned for both 50% and 150% drug release, while d = 0.01 was assigned to 40% and 160% drug release.
For dosage uniformity, the relative standard deviation (RSD) was considered as response. According to Ph. Eur. (2012), RSD should be not more than 2%; and thus d = 1 was assigned for RSD = 0% while d = 0.7 for RSD = 2%. Following Harrington's scale, d = 0.3 was assigned for RSD of 6% and d = 0.01 for RSD of 15%; while for RSD = 25%, d was assigned to be 0.
For identity, d = 1.0 was assigned for those complying with pharmacopoeial specifications for identity and d = 0 for those which do not comply.
Data entry and analysis was carried out using Statistical Package for Social Sciences software (version 16.0 for windows; SPSS). The assay was carried out in triplicate and data were expressed as mean values. The Fisher exact test was used to test the association of the binary quality attributes with the country of origin (5 origins), collection sites (7 cities) and drug outlets (3 types). A more detailed statistical data analysis, based on the fixed effects model with different response variables (product quality attributes) and different categorical covariates derived from our sampling strategy questions was done. FMEA was used to assess the criticality of the quality risks associated with each quality attribute and Derringer's Table 3 . Evaluation criteria and ranking system for the detection of a cause of failure. desirability function was applied to evaluate quality of the products.

A total of one hundred and six samples of MEB, ALB and TNZ were collected between January and March 2012 in seven major cities that represent most parts of the country considering pharmaceutical market and geographic areas. The samples had been collected from 38 premises (wholesales, pharmacies and drug stores). Of these, 42 samples were MBZ, 25 samples were ALB and 39 were TNZ samples. The origin (place of manufacturing) of samples was domestic and foreign (China, India, Korea, and Cyprus). Domestic products constituted 45 Table 5 and are detailed below.
Assay. The assay values for MEB drug products ranged from 68.6 to 132.9%lc (mean: 106.2%), while that of ALB ranged from 87.1 to 111.0%lc (mean: 98.6%). For TNZ drug products, the assay values ranged from 86.1 to 120.6%lc (mean: 105.7%). A box plot of assay by product type, country of origin, supply chain and place of collection is indicated in Fig. 1 and assay test results by product brand is presented in Table 6 .
This study revealed that 29.2% (31/106) of samples did not meet the pharmacopoeial acceptance specification for the assay, and thus are formally classified as substandard medicines [13] . A high failure rate, 45.2% (19/42) was found for MEB tablets followed by TNZ with failure rate of 25.6% (10/39) and 8.0% (2/ 25) of ALB samples. From those 31 samples failing to meet the official specification limit for assay, 80.7% (25/31) of the samples were over-dosed and 19.4% (6/31) were under-dosed. MEB samples showed the highest variation for assay test with a relative standard deviation (RSD) of 12.5%, followed by TNZ and ALB with RSD 6.7% and 4.8% of the labeled amount, respectively. Considering the time left to expiry date, all ALB samples expired in 2013, while for MEB and TNZ, the expiry date was longer, i.e. 2015/16, which can explain the difference in assay values between the 3 drug product classes.
The assay results reveal that the majority of the failed samples contain too much active ingredient that may be introduced intentionally during production (i.e., overages applied). However, as a general principle, use of an over-dose of a drug substance to compensate for loss during manufacture or degradation during a product's shelf life to extend its shelf life, is discouraged [38] .
Disintegration test. In this study, all tablet samples met the official requirement for disintegration time test.
Dissolution test. As shown in Table 5 , from 19 ALB and 39 TNZ samples tested for their in-vitro dissolution, 42.1% (8/19) of ALB and 17.9% (7/39) of TNZ samples failed to meet the official tolerance limits. There is a significant difference between countries of origin with respect to the in-vitro dissolution profile, with all samples manufactured in Ethiopia (19/19) meeting the official tolerance limit and 25.9% (15/58) failure rate observed for the imported products. From the 11 products (4 ALB and 7 TNZ) purposefully selected for the release profile study, all three ALB brands released more than 80.0%lc in 30 minutes except one ALB generic product but a fast release was revealed from one product in which 74.0%lc was released within 10 minutes as presented in Fig. 2 . All four TNZ brands and three generic products released more than 75.0%lc of the dose within 120 minutes as indicated in Fig. 3 . Dosage uniformity. Dosage uniformity is measured to ensure a constant dose of drug between individual dosage forms. All ALB and TNZ samples were in line with pharmacopoeial acceptance criteria for dosage uniformity, but 19.1% (8/42) of MEB samples did not meet these specifications as indicated in Table 5 .
Friability test. A relatively high failure rate (20%) of ALB samples followed by TNZ (7.7%) and MEB (7.1%) was observed in the present study. Overall 10.4% (11/106) of samples failed to meet the friability test (S1-2 Supporting information). The higher friability for ALB products might be related to the rapid disintegration and dissolution of these products.
The results of the RPN values after scores assigned for severity, occurrence and detectability of the failure mode are presented in Table 7 . In the quality attributes subjected to FMEA, a total of 5 failure modes with RPN scores ranging from 2 to 512 were identified. Risk analysis showed that assay (RPN = 512) is the most critical quality attribute followed by dissolution (RPN = 336) and dosage uniformity (RPN 144). Friability was found to be the quality attribute of the least concern according to FMEA analysis applied to product quality assessment.
The results of individual desirability values d i and the overall desirability D are presented in the S2 supporting information. The individual desirability values assigned to the different segments were fitted to the segmented linear model as indicated in Fig. 4 . For each medicine analyzed for the retained 4 quality attributes (assay, dissolution, dosage form uniformity and identity), a global D was finally calculated using the above mentioned d-functions and evaluated using the psychophysical Harrington's scale of quality as presented in Table 4 . According to this scale, it was revealed that 13.2% (14/106) of the products were excellent, while 22.6% (24/106) were good and 35.8% (38/106) were of acceptable quality. Thirty products (28.3%) were found to be of unacceptable quality (low and bad). Moreover, the distribution of the D-values among the investigated products is presented in Fig. 5 .
To address the subject of quality of medicines, different internationally accepted semantics and definitions are used. In this study, the semantics ''poor quality'' was used due to the following reasons: 1) We did not find obvious features which suggest that the investigated samples were counterfeit, falsified and/or unregistered; although we did not explicitly search for counterfeits, falsified and/or unregistered medicines. Therefore, without a detailed investigation involving the manufacturer, distribution-chain and health authorities, it is impractical to rule out this perspective.
and/or good distribution practice (GDP) reasons, and as such, we do not differentiate explicitly between GMP-substandard (at manufacturer) versus degraded substandard (while being good quality at manufacturer). In this study, it was not practical to easily differentiate if poor quality was due to weak GMP or rather inadequate GDP. Moreover, the WHO as well as US-IOM (institute of medicine), and recent expert opinions [39] do not make this distinction and prefer to use the term 'substandard' to address both. Finally, quality does also include the intrinsic stability of the medicine (a very important aspect in tropical climates), which is a function of its composition, quality of ingredients/packaging and manufacturing process [40] . 3) Even though the term 'substandard' literally means ''under the standard'', it is obviously related to a legally required specification mostly interpreted in the national regulations in the approved marketing registration file and/or national pharmacopoeia/compendia, where some still use other quality standards, e.g. Ph.Int. or USP-MC. They all differ not only in quality attributes and methods, but also in acceptance criteria as well. As in Low and Middle Income Countries (LMIC), the legally required standards are often absent and incomplete. Therefore, we prefer to use ''poor quality'' over ''substandard'', as for the investigated products, we were not aware of the legally binding national Ethiopian quality standards. Moreover, we did not only use more international quality specifications, but also wanted to introduce the Taguchi-concept in our quality-evaluation, thus (to some extent) avoiding the ''standard'' issue, with an on-off decision, and replacing it by a quantitative quality number. 4) While other semantics like (S)SFFC, fake, and the like are sometimes used, we believe in accordance with EMA, US-IOM, and recent expert opinions, that for the purpose of this study, a simple 2-dimensional division between falsified and substandard will be sufficient.
In this study, we conducted quality evaluations based on two different approaches: the conventional viewpoint (dichotomous decision based on arbitrarily pharmacopoeial acceptance limits) and the risk-based desirability function approach. The conventional perspective is based on the acceptance criteria set in general and individual monographs of different pharmacopoeias and guidelines, while the desirability function approach is based on quality-by-design (QbD) and risk-based principles whereby clinical relevance is a key factor. A medicine can have many different quality attributes, which are certainly not equally important, i.e. each quality attribute has a different criticality for the clinical use of the medicine. This ICH-recommended risk-based approach is derived from the Taguchi quality philosophy, where any deviation from the optimal point is considered as a less optimal situation and there is no dichotomous decision (see S1-4 Supporting Information).
Therefore, this study reports not only the percentage compliant with the generally accepted pharmacopoeial specification limits for each of the quality attributes using the conventional, dichotomous approach, but also derived a global quality number which encompasses the clinical importance of the different quality attributes. This clinical importance, i.e. criticality or risk if deviating from the optimum, was assessed by quality risk tools: within FMEA, one uses the risk priority number (RPN) to estimate this risk.
In general, the prevalence of poor quality medicines was the highest for ALB tablets (48.0%, 95% CI: 28.4 to 67.6), followed by MEB (45.2%, 95% CI: 30.2 to 60.3) and TNZ (43.6%, 95% CI: Table 7 . Failure mode effects analysis (FMEA) for the different MEB, ALB and TNZ drug product quality attributes. 28.0 to 59.2) tablets (Table 5) . Overall, 45% (48/106) of the analyzed drug samples failed to meet the official tolerance limits for assay, dissolution, friability and uniformity of dose. A similar survey conducted on anti-malarial drugs in Senegal, Madagascar and Uganda identified 44%, 30%, and 26% substandard anti-malarial drugs, respectively [41] . Assay and dissolution profile study for anti-malarial samples conducted in south-east Nigeria reported 37% substandard medicines [42] . Assay based pharmaceutical quality assessment in Kenya reported that many anthelmintic preparations marketed in Kenya were of very poor quality [32] .
The probable causes for the presence of poor quality medicines in developing countries like Ethiopia might be due to poor storage conditions, insufficient quality assurance, poor compliance with good manufacturing practice standards, lack of scientific expertise in manufacturing sector, limited technical capacity and insufficiently well developed regulatory system to evaluate and take action to solve the problems related to drug quality [43] .
From those drug samples collected from pharmacy, about 51.1% (24/46) failed while 46.9% (23/55) and 20.0% (1/5) were the failure rates for those collected from drug store and wholesale, respectively. Even though the sample size was small to generalize, there was significant difference in the pharmacopoeial quality parameter of medicines between the country of origin (P,0.05) but there was no significant association for place of collection and outlets, P.0.05 as presented in Table 8 and Fig. 1 .
Regarding the collection areas, a high failure rate was observed for samples collected from Addis Ababa, Jimma and Adama areas. Since these areas are commercial centers due to their geographic location, it requires special attention by the regulatory offices to control the circulation of these anthelmintic medicines to combat poor quality medicines circulation.
All analyzed samples contained the intended active ingredient. Even though a single case of API-absent medicine is unacceptable, the finding of this study was good as compared to other studies, e.g. in Cambodia (4.2%) [44] . However, 29.2% (31/106) of the samples did not comply with the pharmacopoeial acceptance criteria for assay. Of the MEB samples, 45.2% were found to be of poor quality with respect to assay as per the official tolerance limit. This result is in agreement with the study conducted in Nigeria's pharmacies in which 48% samples of MEB did not comply with set pharmacopoeial limits [31] . On the other hand, ALB samples showed relatively better compliance but still unacceptable as 8.0% did not meet the official acceptance limit for assay. In general, from those drug samples which failed assay test, 19.4% (6/31) were under-dosed. One of the contributing factors for the development of drug resistance is under-dosing due to poor quality medicines [45] .
Uniformity of dosage unit is defined as the degree of uniformity in the amount of active substance among individual dosage units. Content uniformity depends on a number of formulations and manufacturing processes, hence it is obviously unrealistic to presume that every unit contains exactly the same amount of the active ingredient as indicated on the label. Therefore, pharmacopoeial standards and specifications have been established to provide generic limits for allowable variations for the active ingredients in single dosage units considering fitness-for-use and production capability considerations [46] . It was previously reported that (single dose) ALB is more efficacious against hookworm than (triple dose) MEB [47] , which may partly be explained by our quality results revealing that all ALB and TNZ samples fulfill the acceptance criteria for dosage uniformity while 19.1% (8/42) of MEB samples did not meet these pharmacopoeial acceptance criteria.
Friability test is conducted to check whether the weight loss during handling is within 1.0% loss specification limit. As indicated in Table 5 , 5 ALB, and 3 MEB and 3 TNZ tablet samples failed the pharmacopoeial acceptance criteria of friability. The percent weight loss for all the drug samples failing the specification criteria ranges between 2.2 to 6.0%, where the largest weight loss was registered from a MEB tablet sample. Taking into consideration the single dose regimen and the already substandard drugs with content less than 90%lc, this maximum weight loss from friability study by MEB sample could further pose more risk of drug resistance leading to treatment failure than the other two drugs, ALB and TNZ.
In the present study, since all the drug samples tested for disintegration have met the pharmacopoeial acceptance criteria, there is no risk associated with disintegration as a quality attribute. However, 42% of the ALB samples and 18% of the TNZ samples which were tested for dissolution have been found to be out of the pharmacopoeial specification limit. For low solubility drugs, raw material and process variables could have impact on clinical safety and efficacy through their effects on dissolution. Therefore, the risk of clinical failure is higher for ALB than TNZ as more delayed dissolution was observed, which could be due to changes in the drug substance particle size, failure to control granulation, and increased level of binder in the formulation [48] .
The information available on the effectiveness of various BZs derivatives (e.g. ALB and MEB) is somewhat inconsistent [49, 50] . Thus the observations of different therapeutic outcomes have been to some extent attributed to the different polymorphs with different dissolution rates and anthelmintic activities. Solid-state properties play crucial role in dissolution rate and solubility, especially when different polymorphs are involved affecting the invivo performance of the drugs [51] [52] [53] [54] . For example, MEB exists as polymorphs and solvates in the solid state. Of particular importance is the difference in the physicochemical properties of the three known polymorphs A, B, and C. The polymorphic forms of MEB display significant differences in solubility and therapeutic efficacy and form C is preferred clinically due to its optimal bioavailability and reduced toxicity. This is important because polymorph A has no anthelmintic activity alone or when present above 30% in polymorphic mixtures. Literatures indicate that at temperatures typically found in countries located in ICH climatic zones III (hot and dry) and IV (hot and humid) trace amounts of form A in tablets significantly accelerate the transformation of the clinically active polymorph C to form A. This transformation significantly reduces the shelf lives and the dissolution rates of these tablets [55] .
ALB also exhibits some polymorphic forms by forming solvated crystals. Each of these crystals, including the un-solvated form, may exhibit all the aspects of polymorphism. However, solid state characterization of ALB indicated that both forms are physically quite stable [51] . A literature report indicated that TNZ also exhibits crystal polymorphism [56] .
Regarding the use of ALB or MEB, specific attention should be given to the dose appropriate for infants (12 months and less). Apart from the likelihood of both prevalence and intensity being relatively low in infants in areas where soil-transmitted helminthiasis is endemic, there are questions of efficacy and safety when using an anthelmintic drug in very young children [57] . Some studies reveal that the no observed effect level/no observed adverse effect level (NOEL/NOAEL) for ALB is 7 mg/kg/day and that of MEB was found to be 7.8 and 8.4 mg/kg/day in males and females, respectively in experimental animals [58] . Taking the studied ALB tablets, it is possible to assess the associated risk due to the overdosed assay values. The standard treatment guideline for Ethiopia recommends 400 mg tablet as a single dose for treatment of different helminths infections [58] . Assuming an average body weight of 70 kg (body mass index: 23 and height: 175 cm), the NOEL/NOAEL value for ALB can be calculated to be 490 mg per day (taking a safety factor of 1), equivalent with 122.5%lc for a 400 mg tablet. All the assay values for ALB drug products were found to be less than or equal to 111.0%lc, indicating absence of clinically significant risk for the ALB overdosed formulation related to adverse effects. For MEB, since the treatment guideline recommends 200 mg per day [59] and the NOEL/NOAEL value is much higher, the over-dose in the assay values is not a direct clinical concern related to adverse effects. The assay distribution of the analyzed TNZ samples was found to be from 86.1 to 120.6%lc. Considering the 2 g single dose regimen of TNZ for treatment of giardiasis and the high level NOEL/NOAEL value of 150 mg/kg together with the relative clinical safety of TNZ, the over-dose in the assay values is also not a direct clinical concern related to the adverse effects.
Under-dosing, which could be caused by degradation due to inappropriate storage conditions, might pose toxicity risks due to the degradant impurities. It can be one of the risk factors for the development of anthelmintic resistance. Sub-optimal regimens are the rule in human treatment: anthelmintics are administered in single doses that never achieve 100% efficacy. Taking into account the limited efficacy of single dose anthelmintic treatments, the currently recommended regimens could constitute a significant contributing factor to the development of anthelmintic resistance in STH [60] . In addition to the single dose regimen, the substandard drugs with content less than 90%lc, could further exacerbate the problem of drug resistance leading to treatment failure. Therefore, the risk of development of drug resistance to MEB is higher than the other two drugs, ALB and TNZ since four of the six under-dosed substandard drug samples were MEB.
FMEA is a well-known assessment tool used to identify the critical components most likely to cause failures and to enhance system reliability, through the development of suitable corrective and preventive actions (CAPAs) [61] . Typically, the criticality is evaluated either with the criticality number (CN), or with the risk priority number (RPN). Although the CN is considered more consistent and accurate, the RPN approach is generally preferred, especially for its easiness of use [62] , where the higher RPN values indicate the criticality of the quality attribute.
The desirability function and its application in evaluation of quality of medicines Optimizing parameters is a critical issue during the development of any method and/or product. A special set of functions called desirability functions have been used in optimizing methods [63, 64] and products characteristics [65, 66] ; but the application of such desirability functions for the assessment of the quality of pharmaceutical products is new.
The overall desirability function D is obtained from the individual desirabilities (d i ) using Equation 2. It can provide a way to assess the quality according to one property, the overall Dvalue. By mapping all properties onto a desirability scale between 0 and 1, the individual desirability scores due to multiple properties may be easily combined as a geometric mean even if the properties have different scales or units of measurement [67] .
In the calculation of the overall D-value using Equation 2, p i = 3 was used for assay since quality risk associated to it was found to be more important (RPN = 512). Similarly, p i = 2 was used for dissolution since the risk associated with dissolution was of more concern (RPN = 336) than others. For each of identity and dosage uniformity, p i = 1 was assigned. The risk assessment revealed that friability was not critically important with calculated RPN value of only 2 and thus was not considered for the desirability study.
The risk analysis conducted indicated that the failure effects due to the failure modes (non-complying quality attributes) was found to be almost similar for the three products analyzed. For example, for all, the over-dose in the assay values was evaluated to be not a direct clinical concern related to the adverse effects. Moreover, since all the three drugs are in BCS class II [26] , dissolution is equally a concern. Therefore, the same Derringer's desirability function was applied to all the drug products.
In general, comparing the two quality evaluation approaches, it is reported that 29.2% of the samples were of poor quality when using the pharmacopoeial method of quality evaluation, while it is 28.3% using the new innovative risk-based desirability function approach. Even though it seems that there is no discrepancy between the results of the conventional and D-function approach, we still want to argue that the D-approach provides more weight to the clinically more critical quality attributes and thus fit-forpurpose in resource-limited economies. Resources could thus be prioritized and reliable decisions can be made on the available data using only the clinically more critical quality attributes (assay and dissolution) than the less critical ones (friability and disintegration tests). Moreover, the new QbD and risk-based approach will less heavily penalize marginal out-of-specification medicines, and therefore, we believe it is especially important for poor-resource countries.
In conclusion, this study indicated that all sampled products (MEB, ALB and TNZ) did contain the stated active ingredient, but poor quality products were identified in all three medicines and collection sites in the country due to non-compliant assays, inadequate drug release of required dose or toxicity concerns due to over-dosage of some of the medicines containing higher level of active ingredient. Over-dose in the assay values of the three studied drugs is not a direct clinical concern related to adverse effects where as under-dosing constituted one of the risk factors for the development of resistance.
The study further identified the most critical quality attributes in product quality assessment using FMEA risk-based quality evaluation of the three drugs where assay was found to be the most critical quality attribute with highest RPN. Moreover, it was revealed that Derringer's desirability function can be applied to pharmaceutical quality assessment using Psychophysical Harrington's scale of quality where products could be classified into excellent, good, acceptable, low and bad quality.
Our study suggests policy strategies of containing the problems related to poor quality medicines using this proactive risk-based and desirability function approaches in nation-wide surveillance of the quality of medicines circulating in their respective markets. Furthermore, other possible strategies for containing the problem of these poor quality medicines are e.g.:
N strengthening the capacity of drug regulatory authorities for quality assurance and quality control activities; N harmonization and regional sharing of information about manufacturing and distribution quality; N enforcement of regulations and legal prosecutions; N empowerment and capacity building of medicines inspectors; N continuous inspection and monitoring of the different levels of medicines supply chain; N continuous and sustainable product quality surveillance studies with strong monitoring and evaluation activities
Supporting Information S1 The chemical structures of ALB, MEB and TNZ (S1-1); Quality attributes and corresponding pharmacopoeial specifications for ALB, MEB and TNZ tablet products (S1-2); Details of laboratory test methods (S1-3); Experts selected from Belgium and Ethiopia for severity ranking (S1-4); and Risk analysis (S1-5). 
Chronic periodontitis (CP) is an inflammatory disease of the teeth-supporting tissues in which genetic predisposition, dental plaque bacteria, and immune mechanisms all play important roles. Bacteria which are involved in the pathogenesis of CP include Porphyromonas gingivalis, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Tannerella forsythia, Prevotella intermedia, and Fusobacterium nucleatum. The participation of these bacteria in the pathogenesis of CP correlates with an increased level of specific antibodies in sera [1] . Suspect pathogens isolated from dental plaque continually stimulate cells in the periodontal tissue to produce cytokines as well as other biologically active molecules. The development and regulation of the immune response depend on the local production and quantities of cytokines and other mediators which influence disease progression or resolution. The disease progression depends on the increased production of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1 , IL-1 , IL-6, IL-8, and TNF ), metalloproteinases, and prostaglandins or decreased production of anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10, TGF ) and inhibitors of metalloproteinases [2] .
Based on the concept of different functions of TH1 and TH2 lymphocytes [3] , Seymour et al. [4] proposed the hypothesis that, in patients with progressing CP, clones of TH2 are generated upon activation with bacteria, while, in the nonprogressing disease, stable lesions are regulated by TH1 clones. We confirmed these findings in our previous longitudinal studies in which we followed, for a period of 10 years, patients with early onset periodontitis (EOP, now known as aggressive periodontitis) with changes in periodontal tissues diagnosed between the ages of 17 and 25. Such patients repeatedly exhibited increased production of IL-4 (TH2) upon stimulation of peripheral blood lymphocytes with dental plaque bacteria while their healthy siblings and other genetically unrelated controls with intact periodontal tissues produced a significantly increased level of IFN (TH1) [5] . As mentioned above, both the onset and progression of periodontal diseases are strongly influenced by the genetic predisposition of the individual. The heritability of the disease varies from a nearly 100% share in "Mendelian/syndromological" forms to states with a low proportion of heritability and a high effect of environmental factors. Rateitschak et al. [6] described the genetic predisposition for early onset periodontitis; according to Michalowicz [7] , genes are responsible for more than 50% of the risk of chronic periodontitis. The 1990s witnessed the beginning of the phase of genetic analysis at the level of so-called "candidate" genes, that is, genes mostly coding proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, metalloproteinases, and other factors associated with the production of these mediators and their presumed role in the pathogenesis of the disease [8, 9] . The current development of methodological options underlies the present era of genome-wide studies [10] . Polymorphisms in certain alleles of cytokines have been associated with susceptibility to a wide range of infectious or immune diseases, including periodontitis [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] and others. The human interleukin-4 (IL-4) gene is mapped within the cytokine gene cluster on chromosome 5q31-33 and contains several polymorphisms; some of them are implicated in the regulation of IL-4 production. Recently, these polymorphisms have attracted widespread attention, especially the IL-4 gene promoter -590C/T (rs2243250) polymorphism and a 70 bp variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism in its third intron. It was proposed that an increased responsiveness of the -590C/T allele and the (70 base pairs (bp)) 2 repeat allele to transcriptional activation might lead to overexpression of IL-4 [17] .
However, the role of these polymorphisms in cytokine genes in the production of cytokines in response to stimulation by dental plaque bacteria in periodontal disease has not yet been studied. The aim of this study was to assess the influence of IL-4 (-590C/T) and IL-4 VNTR (variable number of tandem repetitions in intron 3 gene) polymorphisms on cytokine production after stimulation of isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells by dental plaque bacteria, mitogens, and HSP70 in patients with periodontitis and in healthy controls. [18] , and agreement with sample collection for genetic/immunological examinations. Exclusion criteria included history of cardiovascular disorders (such as coronary artery diseases or hypertension), diabetes mellitus, malignant diseases, immunodeficiency, current pregnancy or lactation, and smoking. The control group (healthy/nonperiodontitis subjects, = 15) were selected randomly during the same period as patients and matched for age, gender, and nonsmoking status. All controls had at least 20 remaining teeth, were general healthy, and agree with genetic/immunological examinations. Exclusion criteria were the same as those applied with patients with periodontitis.
Diagnosis of nonperiodontitis/periodontitis was based on a detailed clinical examination, medical and dental history, tooth mobility, and radiographic assessment. Probing depth (PD) and clinical attachment loss (CAL) were collected by UNC-15 periodontal probe from six sites on every tooth present. All patients had to have at least three teeth with bleeding on probing (BOP), PD of >4 mm, and CAL of ≥3 mm in all quadrants (excluding the third molars); however, they were treated patients without active phase of disease. The loss of alveolar bone was determined radiographically. We used the Mühlemann index to evaluate decreases in alveolar bone levels [19] . The control group (healthy periodontium) consisted of subjects with no history or clinical signs of gingivitis and/or periodontitis (no PPD of >4 mm, no loss of clinical attachment around any tooth, and no radiographic sign of bone resorption).
The study was performed with the approval of the Committees for Ethics of the Medical Faculty, Masaryk University Brno and St. Anne's Faculty Hospital. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants in line with the Helsinki declaration before inclusion in the study.
Isolation of Genomic DNA. DNA for genetic analysis was extracted from the peripheral blood leukocytes (5 mL) using standard phenol/chloroform procedures with proteinase K according to Sambrook et al. [20] .
The GenBank accession number was AF395008 for the reference genomic sequence used for IL-4 alignments. The IL-4 SNP polymorphism at position -590C/T (rs2243250) was genotyped by PCR-RFLP analysis according to previously published methods [21] ∘ C for 1 min. The last synthesis step was extended to 10 min at 72 ∘ C. Amplified products were separated on 2% agarose gel; the size of the product corresponds to the number of the repeats present (allele 1 = 3 repeats (254 bp); allele 2 = 2 repeats (184 bp)). The rarely occurring allele type 3 with only a single repeat (114 bp) was not present in our set.
The genotyping was performed by P. B. L. unaware of the phenotype. DNA samples with known genotypes, which were identified by sequencing of these samples in the previous study by Holla et al. [14] , were used as positive controls for both polymorphisms.
Bacteria. Samples of the sulcular fluid for the cultivation of bacteria (A. actinomycetemcomitans, P. gingivalis, T. forsythia, and P. intermedia) were collected from sites of periodontium with the worst affected areas of periodontium. A volume of 50 L of a sample diluted by 2 mL Brain Heart medium was inoculated on the surface of microbiological diagnostic media in Petri dishes. Selective cultivation of bacteria was performed according to the method of Slots [23] on TSBV agar incubated at 37 ∘ C in 10% CO 2 atmosphere created by GasPak CO 2 bags (Oxoid) in an anaerobic pot. Bacteria colonies were harvested after 5 to 7 days and bacterial suspension containing 10 10 cells/mL was inactivated by incubation at 120 ∘ C for 20 minutes. Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 600 g. Sediments were diluted with PBS and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 600 g and then washed 3 times. The washed sediments were diluted by X-Vivo medium to optical density corresponding to 10 10 cells/mL.
Examination. 20 mL of peripheral blood was collected from the subjects under examination to BD Vacutainer with sodium heparin as anticoagulant (BD, Plymouth, UK). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated from heparinized blood by Histopaque 1.077 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) gradient centrifugation for 30 min at 600 g. The white layer in the interphase containing mononuclear cells was collected and washed with X-vivo 10 medium at 400 g and 200 g and then diluted with X-Vivo 10 serum-free tissue medium (Cambrex) to the concentration of 10 7 cells/mL. 100 L cells were cultivated for 3 days at 37 ∘ C in 5% CO 2 atmosphere and stimulated with 100 L of the bacteria with concentration of 10 9 /mL (A. actinomycetemcomitans, P. gingivalis, T. forsythia, and P. intermedia), HSP 70 (Sigma, 5 g/mL), Pokeweed mitogen (PWM, Sigma, 2.5 g/mL), and Pokeweed mitogen in costimulation with Concanavalin A (PWM, Sigma, 2.5 g/mL + ConA, Sigma, 10 g/mL) and supplemented with X-vivo 10 medium to l mL (Table 2) . After the 3 days of cultivation, the medium was collected and stored at −20 ∘ C for the determination of cytokines (IL-1 , IL-1 , IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, IFN , TNF , and VEGF) by the Luminex multiplex method (LUMINEX 100TM analyzer, R&D Systems, USA). Cytokine production in subjects with different genotypes of IL-4 polymorphism was then compared.
Statistically significant results (for < 0.05, < 0.01, and < 0.001) are indicated in Tables 3(a) and 3(b) representing medians for dichotomous variants, separately for patients with periodontitis ( = 47) and for healthy controls ( = 15). Calculations were performed in SPSS (version 17.0).
The differences in production of cytokines inside the two groups of patients (with periodontitis and controls) in combination with investigated IL-4 polymorphisms were preliminarily analyzed by multiple use of the Kruskal-Wallis test [24] with two adjacent alleles with minority representations in sample populations being always tied into one (see Tables 3(a) and 3(b) where alleles with significantly higher levels of cytokines are marked right over sample medians). Alternatively, we computed two matrices of Spearman rank correlation coefficients [25] (one for patients with periodontitis and another one for controls) between observed levels of cytokines and IL-4 polymorphisms and compared the observed levels of significance for the two methods (see Figure 1 , where only statistically significant relations are highlighted by arrows.) Statistically significant results (for < 0.05, < 0.01, and < 0.001) are indicated in Tables  3(a) 
The mean ages for periodontitis patients (51.53 ± 6.52 years, mean ± SD) and healthy subjects (46.13 ± 9.65) did not differ between the two groups. There were no significant differences ( > 0.05) between subjects with periodontitis and controls regarding the average age, nonsmoking status, and ratio of males/females (4/11 in controls, 21/26 in patients with periodontitis) (Table 1) .
Both studied polymorphisms (IL-4 -590C/T and VNTR in intron 3) were in the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the control group. Allele and genotype frequencies of IL-4 polymorphisms were not significantly different between the subjects with periodontitis and controls ( > 0.05; data not shown). Among 45 patients with CP, there were 2 patients with slight (1 or 2 mm CAL), 11 patients with moderate (3 or 4 mm CAL), and 32 patients with severe form of CP Table 3 ); application of Spearman rank correlations does not reduce any data and slightly more supports the hypotheses related to expression of cytokines on homozygous allele. (≥5 mm CAL). When comparing genotypes (IL-4 -590CC versus CT + TT and IL-4 VNTR 11 versus 12 + 22) between patients with the slight/moderate ( = 13) and severe ( = 32) form of periodontitis, we found no statistically significant differences between both groups ( = 0.50 for IL-4 -590C/T and = 0.61 for IL-4 VNTR polymorphisms). Both patients and healthy controls were divided into groups according to the polymorphisms in IL-4 gene (homozygote for CC versus CT + TT genotypes for -590C/T variant and homozygote 11 versus 12 + 22 genotypes for VNTR). Tables 3(a) and 3(b) illustrate medians of the cytokine levels measured after a 3-day in vitro stimulation of lymphocytes isolated from peripheral blood of patients and healthy controls by dental plaque bacteria, mitogens, and HSP70.
The results in Table 3 (b) show that the measured values of IL-4 and IL-5 (in pg/mL) were very low and no significant differences between groups in the levels of these cytokines were detected. Conversely, the level of IL-6 was relatively high in both patients with periodontitis and healthy controls. The levels of IL-6 after stimulation of lymphocytes by the bacterium P. intermedia in patients carrying the IL-4 -590CC and IL-4 VNTR 11 genotype were significantly higher than in the carriers of -590CT genotypes and IL-4 VNTR 12 + 22 ( < 0.05). A similar statistically significant difference in the production of IL-6 and also TNF after stimulation by T. forsythia was detected in the carriers of IL-4 VNTR 11 genotype when compared with patients carrying genotypes 12 or 22 ( < 0.05). The results in Table 3 (a) show that lymphocytes from patients with periodontitis carrying CC genotype of the IL-4 -590 polymorphism or 11 genotype of the IL-4 VNTR produced more IFN ( < 0.01 and < 0.05, resp.) after stimulation with T. forsythia and also more IL-10 after stimulation with T. forsythia and P. intermedia (from < 0.001 to < 0.05). IL-10 was significantly increased in group of healthy persons carrying genotypes CC IL-4 -590 after stimulation with T. forsythia. On the other hand, no significant differences in the production of IL-17 and IL-1 after stimulation by dental plaque bacteria were determined in periodontitis patients carrying the IL-4 gene polymorphisms in this study. Production of IL-1 was significantly higher in patients with periodontitis carrying the CC genotype IL-4 -590C/T variant after stimulation with T. forsythia and in the unstimulated culture ( < 0.05). Subjects carrying genotype IL-4 VNTR 11 were found to have a higher production of IL-1 after stimulation with nearly all agents (from < 0.01 to < 0.05) except for the stimulation with P. gingivalis and P. intermedia ( > 0.05).
Within the group of healthy controls, statistically significant differences were observed only between subjects with CC versus CT and TT genotypes in IL-4 -590 polymorphism after stimulation with T. forsythia ( < 0.05). The highest difference in the production of cytokine IL-1 was observed between controls carrying genotypes CT and TT versus CC after stimulation with HSP70 and A. actinomycetemcomitans and in unstimulated culture ( < 0.05). A significantly higher production of IL-1 was found only in the unstimulated culture in patients with genotypes IL-4 VNTR 11. We did not find any significant differences in cytokines production after stimulation by PWM, PWM + Con A, and HSP70 in both examined groups. Figure 1 shows the results of a parallel evaluation of these relationships by Spearman's correlation analysis; they are identical with the data in Tables 3(a) and 3(b) and clearly show the relationship of both IL-4 polymorphisms to cytokine production after the stimulation by the studied bacteria. Figure 1 shows that, in patients with periodontitis, homozygotes "CC" of IL-4 -590C/T polymorphism and "11" of IL-4 VNTR play an important role in the response of peripheral blood lymphocytes to stimulation with bacteria. T. forsythia is an important stimulator of production of cytokines TNF , IL-6, IL-10, IFN , IL-10, and IL-1 while P. intermedia affects the in vitro production of IL-6 and IL-10 in patients with periodontitis. Production of IL-17, IL-4, and IL-5 was not affected by the short-term stimulation by any of the above factors (Figure 1 ).
The interactions between periodontal pathogens and the immune response of the organism require knowledge of the pathogenesis of periodontal disease. The activation of dental plaque bacteria involves the development of local and systemic humoral and cellular immunity. The illness is characterized by accumulation of lymphocytes in the periodontal tissues; the inflammatory infiltrate is dominated at the beginning by T lymphocytes while the later chronic phase shows the shift to B lymphocytes and plasma cells [26] .
After in vitro stimulation with P. gingivalis and F. nucleatum, most lymphocytes obtained from biopsies of periodontitis-affected tissues were of the TH2 phenotype [4] . Inactivation of IFN-and IL-2 by gingipains from P. gingivalis at inflammatory sites could also downregulate TH1 responses (associated with nonaggressive periodontal lesions) and promote TH2 pathways and polyclonal B-cell activation in advanced periodontitis [27] . Based on our previous experience and discussed publications, we have selected periopathogens and mitogens to be tested in this study. PWM was used as T and B cells stimulator and it was used in combination with Concanavalin A that activates T regulatory mechanisms; HSP70 was used as an indicator of shock response of inflamed tissue.
We suppose low levels of investigated cytokines after stimulation with P. gingivalis were found as a consequence The results of the present study point to the importance of single nucleotide IL-4 gene polymorphisms in periodontal disease. One of the most important findings is the proof that the -590C/T polymorphism in the promoter region and VNTR in intron 3 of the gene encoding IL-4 affect not only the production of this interleukin, as described earlier [28] [29] [30] , but also the production of other cytokines in response to the action of dental plaque bacteria or selected mitogens, this effect being much more conspicuous in patients with chronic periodontitis when compared with healthy controls.
The greatest effect of stimulation with T. forsythia on production of IL-10 was observed in patients with periodontitis carrying the genotypes CC (-590C/T) and 11 (VNTR) of the gene encoding IL-4 while the increase in the levels of IFN , IL-1 , IL-6, and TNF in patients with the same genotypes was lower ( < 0.05). The levels of regulatory cytokine IL-10 in patients with periodontitis carrying the appropriate genotypes of IL-4 polymorphisms were also significantly increased, after stimulation with P. intermedia. In contrast to patients that exhibited increased production of the abovementioned cytokines in the presence of genotypes CC or 11, higher production of IL-1 after stimulation with HSP70 and the bacterium A. actinomycetemcomitans was found in control subjects carrying the combination CT + TT (IL-4 -590C/T) and 12 (IL-4 VNTR).
Based on our previous results [5, 15] , we assumed that, after stimulation with dental plaque bacteria, IL-4 gene polymorphisms in periodontitis patients would in particular affect the production of cytokine IL-4. Contrary to this assumption, no significant increase was found in the level of IL-4, while stimulation with T. forsythia and P. intermedia resulted in significantly higher levels of other cytokines. These results are in keeping with the data in a number of recent studies which documented that polymorphisms in genes encoding some cytokines or their receptors can affect the production of not only their own but also other mediators. The results of the study by Wallis et al. [31] indicate that I50V SNP in part IL-4R controls production of IL-17 by TH17 cells cultured from healthy individuals. Similarly, the minor allele of the IL-4R SNP (rs1805010), which confers impaired IL-4 signaling and has been associated with an aggressive destructive course of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), contributes to increased TH17 cell frequency, enhanced clinical activity, and accelerated radiographic progression in RA by rendering CD4 T cells from RA [32] .
Cytokines play a key role in modulation of immune reaction. All cytokines are pleiotropic. They have the ability to interact with specific receptors on the cell surface and can modulate receptor expression for other cytokines. The same biological function of cytokines is influenced by several distinct cytokines (cytokine cross talk). This is a biologically important feature: if one cytokine is absent or its level limited, substitution by another cytokine exists and may be regulated by IL-4 gene polymorphisms in patients with CP [33] . Our results presented in Table 3 (b) show that IL-4 gene polymorphisms influence the production of another TH2 cytokine IL-6. IL-6 is an interleukin that acts as both a proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokine. The role of IL-6 is anti-inflammatory: it has an inhibitory effect on TNF and IL-1 production and it activates production of IL-1 ra and regulatory IL-10. We suppose that the higher median detected in the healthy group as compared to periodontitis patients group after stimulation of their lymphocytes by P. intermedia may be explained by the anti-inflammatory properties of IL-6.
There were several limitations to this study. For instance, the short cultivation time of lymphocytes isolated from peripheral blood with bacteria and mitogens. Also, the healthy control and periodontitis groups were not precisely matched by sex. Lastly, the small sample size precludes any robust claims and points to the need for additional large longitudinal studies of cohorts of patients with periodontitis. For this reason, two statistical methods for evaluation of results were used.
It appears that the knowledge of the genetic background of chronic periodontitis will remain for quite some time on the level of knowledge of individual "potential" risk or protective factors whose effect on the disease will depend on a broader, still unexplored genetic background and a number of epigenetic factors. The differences in the findings published in individual studies are hindered by the fact that individual populations in the world can differ in the frequencies of the alleles of appropriate polymorphisms. Other factors that may play a role are different approaches to data evaluation and differences in clinical evaluation and selection of patients. For example, the periodontitis of young subjects, formerly presented as early onset periodontitis or juvenile periodontitis, is currently classified as aggressive Table 3 : Sample medians for cytokine levels expressed by mitogens (PWM, P + C), by HSP70, and by selected bacteria in comparison to patients with periodontitis ( = 47) and healthy controls ( = 15) in division to groups by IL-4 genotypes (polymorphisms). periodontitis. In a longitudinal (10-year) study, we explored the progression of early onset periodontitis in patients aged 17-25 years at the beginning of the study. Over the years, the disease in some patients progressed while in others it did not [15, 34] . According to current criteria, all patients would be classified at the beginning of the study as suffering from aggressive periodontitis. This fact points to the importance of preventive examinations focused on the initial changes of the periodontium of young subjects and on early preventive therapy.
Our study suggests that polymorphisms in the IL-4 gene not only affect the production of the IL-4 cytokine but can influence production of several other cytokines, such as IL-10, IFN , IL-1 , IL-6, and TNF , which in turn can affect periodontal disease. Further studies are needed to clarify the association of these polymorphisms with cytokine production in other populations.
Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers and the leading cause of cancer related death worldwide. [1] [2] [3] Surgery remains the best curative option for patients with lung cancer. 4 However, postoperative pulmonary complications (PPCs) are observed at high frequencies and are the major cause of postoperative morbidity and mortality in patients undergoing radical lung surgery. [5] [6] [7] Mechanical ventilation, surgical procedure, and anesthesia can all induce a severe inflammatory response; prolonged high levels of inflammatory cytokines and neutrophil elastase are related to the development of postoperative complications. 8 Ulinastatin, a human protease inhibitor found in urine, has the capacity to inhibit both the activity of neutrophilic elastase and the activation of proinflammatory cytokines. 9, 10 Previous studies have demonstrated that ulinastatin can improve clinical outcomes in patients with acute inflammation, such as acute pancreatitis, shock, cardiac surgery, and organ transplantation, and can alleviate acute lung injury as a result of severe burns, sepsis, esophagectomy surgery, and hemorrhagic shock.
Although some trials have demonstrated that ulinastatin can prevent the intraoperative and postoperative increase in proinflammatory cytokines for lung resection surgery, its impact on postoperative complications and clinical outcomes remains unknown. Therefore, we designed this randomized prospective pilot study for further multi-center research to examine the effects of intraoperative high-dose ulinastatin treatment on early postoperative clinical outcomes in patients undergoing lung resection surgery.

This trial was performed in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The Ethical Committee of West China Hospital, Sichuan, China approved the protocol of this study. All patients signed written informed consent before entering the study.
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) stage I-IV patients (aged 30-80 years, American Society of Anesthesiologists classification ≤ III) were enrolled into the study. All patients had undergone elective radical thoracotomy in the Lung Cancer Treatment Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, China, in 2014 or 2015. Patients: (i) with allergies to ulinastatin; (ii) who had secondary surgery for recurrent tumors; (iii) with other malignant tumors; (iv) who required preoperative mechanical ventilation (> 1 hour) within two weeks; and (v) with a body mass index (BMI) ≥ 35 kg/m 2 , were excluded. The study was a randomized, prospective, placebo-controlled, double blind trial. The consecutively enrolled 108 patients were randomly assigned into ulinastatin group (group U) and control group (group C) according to the computer generated random numbers.
Patients in group U were intravenously infused with ulinastatin (Techpool, Guangdong, China) at a rate of 20 000 U/ kg/hour for the first hour after anesthesia induction and then at a rate of 5000 U/kg/hour (diluted into 20 mL using normal saline) until the conclusion of surgery. For group C, the ulinastatin solution was replaced with normal saline in the same volume and infused at the same rate. A nurse who was not participating in the study opened the randomized envelopes and prepared the study drug solution.
The same surgeon performed all surgeries. Five-lead electrocardiogram (ECG), pulse oximetry (SPO 2 ), end-tidal carbon dioxide tension (EtCO 2 ), bispectral index (BIS), invasive blood pressure (BP), and central venous pressure (CVP) were recorded throughout the surgery. Arterial blood samples were collected through the radial artery before surgery, 30 minutes after one lung ventilation (OLV), and 30 minutes after re-two lung ventilation (re-TLV). The respiratory parameters and vital signs were recorded at the same time.
Patients received volume-controlled mechanical ventilation with a tidal volume (VT) of 6-8 mL/kg of predicted body weight, a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 6-8 cm of water and a recruitment maneuver (applying a continuous positive airway pressure of 30 cm of water for 30 seconds), repeated every 30 minutes for lung reexpansion before and after OLV to avoid atelectasis. In case of desaturation during OLV (defined as a peripheral oxygen saturation less than 90%), rescue therapy was proposed and consisted of increasing FiO 2 to 100% and continuously uptaking oxygen in the non-ventilated lung for 3-5 L/minutes or discontinuing TLV until oxygen saturation had reached the target value (oxygen saturation ≥ 90%). The fluid infusion speed was adjusted according to bleeding quantity and CVP, and blood products were used according to blood transfusion guidelines. After surgery, all patients were transferred into the intensive care unit (ICU), with a tracheal tube.
The postoperative clinical course of each patient was carefully observed daily until discharge and pulmonary complications were evaluated. For patients discharged within 30 days after surgery, information was retrieved via telephone follow-up. Postoperative complications were observed and evaluated by a blinded assessor.
Ulinastatin-related adverse events were defined as shock, rash, itching, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, allergy, or neutropenia.
The primary outcome of the study was to determine postoperative pulmonary complications (PPCs). PPCs were defined as the presence of pneumonia, bronchopleural fistula, massive atelectasis, adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), acute lung injury (ALI), or respiratory failure without signs of pneumonia and/or atelectasis that required prolonged management by artificial ventilation. 15 Pulmonary complications resulting from postoperative recurrent nerve palsy were excluded. 16 PPC morbidities were attributed in a binary fashion by patient to ensure that a patient with more than one event was only counted once. 17 The secondary outcomes were hospital mortality, chest drainage, cardiovascular complications (arrhythmia, acute cardiac failure), wound infection, and duration of ICU and postoperative hospital stays. Operative mortality was defined as patient death after surgery before discharge from the hospital or within 30 days of surgery. 17 Other clinical outcomes evaluated included blood routine and biochemical tests in the first 24 hours after surgery.
The respiratory index (RI), dynamic lung compliance (Cdyn), and oxygenation index (OI) during surgery were calculated according to the following formulas: RI = P(AaO 2 
Statistical analyses were carried out with SPSS version 17.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Normally distributed continuous data were expressed as mean AE standard deviation; non-normal distributed data were expressed as median (interquartile range). Enumeration data were expressed as count proportion. One-way analysis of variance was used for continuous variables. Chi-square or Fisher's exact tests were used to compare categorical data. P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Between November 2014 and August 2015, of 338 patients screened, 117 patients were enrolled; 108 (92.31%) patients completed the pilot study, with 52 in the ulinastatin and 56 in the control group (Fig 1) .
The baseline patient characteristics were balanced between the two groups (P > 0.05), except for base excess (BE), which was lower in group U (−0.28 AE 1.67) than in group C (0.49 AE 1.91; P = 0.046; Table 1 ).
Primary clinical outcome Primary clinical outcomes are presented in Table 2 . Similar results were obtained between the two groups for primary clinical outcomes. PPCs were observed in 20 patients (38.46%) in group U and 27 (48.21%) in group C. Pulmonary complications occurred less frequently in group U; however, there was no significant difference (P = 0.307).
Secondary clinical outcomes are presented in Table 2 . Except for chest drainage duration, no significant differences were observed between the groups (P > 0.05). Chest drainage duration in eight patients (15.4%) in group U and 18 (32.1%) in group C was longer than five days (P = 0.039). Hospital mortality did not differ between the groups (P = 0.649). Two patients in each group died within 30 days after surgery. There were no differences in the amount of chest drainage, arrhythmia, heart failure, or length of ICU or postoperative hospital stay between the two groups (P > 0.05).
The level of postoperative creatinine in the serum in group U (87.31 AE 33.16) was higher than in group C (80.53 AE 19.95; P = 0.013; Table 3 ). Other postoperative clinical courses between the two groups were similar (P > 0.05).
There were no significant differences observed in RI, OI, or Cdyn at all three time points (preoperative; OLV 30 minutes; re-TLV 30 minutes) between the two groups (P > 0.05; Fig 2) .
No adverse events related to ulinastatin administration were observed during the study. 
In this clinical trial, the observed rate of postoperative complications was slightly higher than previously reported (3.3-40%). 18 Of the 108 patients enrolled, 38.46% patients in the U group and 48.21% in the control developed pulmonary complications. In part, this was a result of the inclusion of NSCLC stage III-IV patients (61.11%) who experienced more extensive surgery trauma, as well as patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (varying from mild to severe), both of which are associated with increased morbidity rates. 19, 20 Most previously reported studies only included early stage NSCLC patients with almost normal lung function. 21 Continuous intraoperative infusion of high-dose ulinastatin was not observed to lead to significantly improved clinical outcomes after radical lung cancer resection in this trial. Ulinastatin has been shown in previous studies to alleviate inflammatory response and to improve the respiratory parameters in patients undergoing lung resection surgery. 22, 23 Few studies, especially prospective, randomized, and controlled studies, however, have observed the effect of ulinastatin on clinical outcomes in patients undergoing radical lung cancer resection. Although some studies found that ulinastatin was effective in the treatment of ALI and ARDS, these findings were mainly from patients with sepsis, acute pancreatitis, and burn injuries, and the treatment always lasted for a long period. [24] [25] [26] A systematic meta-analysis demonstrated that ulinastatin significantly decreased ICU mortality and the length of ICU stay in patients with ALI and ARDS, while 28-day mortality was not significantly affected. 27 Another systematic meta-analysis revealed that intraoperative ulinastatin did not affect hospital mortality, postoperative complication rate, or length of ICU stay in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. 13 Lung cancer surgery consists of complex trauma, including the surgical removal of part of lung, OLV, mechanical ventilation, and anesthesia, which can induce pulmonary and systemic injuries. In our study, over 60% of the patients were stage III-IV NSCLC patients, considered high-risk. Our results suggest that ulinastatin may have limited benefits for high-risk patients or those undergoing complicated surgery. However, injuries caused by lung surgery may last days or weeks, and ulinastatin was only used during surgery in our study. Further research is required to determine whether prolonged administration of ulinastatin after surgery is of benefit.
Pulmonary complications occurred less frequently in patients treated with ulinastatin (38.46% in group U vs. 48.21% in group C). We also observed that ulinastatin administration led to a shorter duration of postoperative chest drainage. These findings suggest, to some extent, that intraoperative ulinastatin might promote the recovery of lung injuries caused by surgery. 25 As a protease inhibitor of neutrophil elastase, ulinastatin can alleviate pulmonary edema, hemorrhage, and inflammatory exudation in acute lung injuries through mitigation of the inflammatory reaction and inhibition of immunosuppression. [28] [29] [30] [31] We used ulinastatin at high doses until the conclusion of surgery. It has been demonstrated that ulinastatin works in a dose-dependent manner and was safe at a dose of 20 000 U/kg in a tolerance trial. 26, [32] [33] [34] Thus, we designed this pilot study to treat patients with ulinastatin at 20 000 U/kg/hour for the first hour after anesthesia induction and then 5000 U/kg/hour until the conclusion of surgery in an attempt to achieve the maximal antiinflammatory effect. This practice suggested that an increase in the dose of ulinastatin during surgery might be limited; however, an examination of the use of ulinastatin after surgery may be worth further trials.
Our study has some limitations. As only 108 patients were enrolled, the population might not be large enough to determine differences. Large-scale research is needed for verification of the possible protective effects of ulinastatin in thoracotomy patients. The patients enrolled underwent four types of surgeries: sublobectomy, lobectomy, biolectomy, and peneumonectomy. Although the distribution between U and C groups was well balanced, this might be a confounding factor and requires further stratified analysis. We only measured direct clinical indicators and did not measure inflammatory markers in this pilot study. As mentioned, ulinastatin reduces the injury caused by inflammatory response; therefore, the protective effect of ulinastatin may be reflected by changes in inflammatory markers. Finally, we did not observe the effect of ulinastatin on long-term outcomes. Ulinastatin is believed to not only protect tissues and organs from severe inflammatory response, but also inhibit tumor invasion and metastasis. 9, 35 Further studies are necessary to confirm the inhibitory effect of ulinastatin on lung cancer invasion and metastasis.
In summary, the present study revealed no significant positive effects of ulinastatin on postoperative pulmonary complications and other outcomes for lung cancer patients undergoing radical thoracotomy. However, a protective trend of ulinastatin was observed. Further research is warranted.
Catalytic hydrodehalogenation (HdCl) of harmful organic compounds, such chloromethanes, CFCs or chlorobenzenes on supported metal catalysts, appear a useful method for transforming those detrimental compounds into valuable chemicals [1, 2] . The active phase of these catalysts are metals, among which the best performance show platinum, palladium and nickel [2] [3] [4] [5] . Recently published review article by Colombo et al. [6] highlights the suitability of iron catalysts in removing chlorocarbons from the water. In addition, the performance of the iron in water decontamination can be greatly improved by doping with other metals such as palladium, copper, silver and nickel. Besides, the role of support should not only be considered as a metal redispersing medium. Carbon is the support of industrial choice for a number of reasons, including high specific surface area and stability against corrosion by halogen-containing products of hydrodehalogenation (HCl, HF) . Research with the use of other supports, such as silica, alumina, zeolites or magnesia, served mainly for short-term model studies, when the functioning of various metallic phases is tested. The role of acido-basic properties of a support is not well understood, although several suggestions were made in this respect. Studied in the reaction of hydrodechlorination of 1,1-dichlorotetrafluoroethane, Pd catalysts supported on AlF 3 and MgF 2 (characterized by very dissimilar acidities) did not show large differences in their catalytic behavior [7] . It would speak against any special effect of support acidity on the hydrodechlorination performance. However, it is also known that the acidic or basic character of the support would modify metal particles, making them electrodeficient or electron-rich. The electron deficiency was found to depend on the concentration and the location of Brønsted acid sites [8] . Such effect would lead to a weaker interaction of the metal with reaction intermediates contributing to higher activities and product selectivities to, frequently desired, partly dehalogenated compounds [5, 9] . Similarly, optimal combination of Pd σ+ and Pd • species has recently been invoked for the best hydrodechlorination performance [10, 11] . Electrodeficient palladium, Pd 2+ , has been reported to improve the activity of Pd catalysts in HdCl reactions [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] .
On the other hand, the presence of support acid centers would also lead to accumulation of polymeric species and catalyst's fouling by coking [18, 19] . Less acidic supports would act as chlorine "sink", keeping the metal surface clean for a considerable time of reaction. This does not seem to function for highly acidic supports which, in addition, produce polymeric species, which in turn would be spilt over onto the metal surface [18] .
In this respect, advantages of MgO as appropriate support of the hydrodechlorination catalyst are presented by several authors [20] [21] [22] . The high activity of the Pt/MgO catalyst was ascribed to basic properties of MgO. The basicity of this oxide seems to be responsible for retarding the coke formation and suppression of C 2 oligomers (C 2 Cl 4 and C 2 Cl 6 mainly) which are the principal reasons for the catalyst deactivation. Clarke et al. [23] studied MgO-supported Pt catalysts in the hydrogenolysis of C 5 -C 6 hydrocarbons and came to conclusion that large changes in the catalytic behavior of platinum result from negative charge from the magnesia O 2− ions to the metal. Suitability of MgF 2 -supported metal catalysts for HdCl reactions was proved in numerous studies [7, 14, 20, 21, [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] . Because of a variety of investigated reactants, metal precursors (metal salts vs. phosphine complexes of metals, [28] ), metal dispersion and structural forms of MgF 2 (high surface area form [26] vs. well-crystalline [25] ) it difficult to describe shortly this issue in much detail. However, a general overview appears to appreciate very good overall activity, selectivity to desired products and stability of MgF 2 -supported metals, usually exceeding the performance of their counterparts supported on oxidic carriers. The most often explanation takes into account the beneficial effect of MgF 2 on metal centers making them electrodeficient. MgO → MgF 2 transformation during HdCl of CFCs over MgO-supported metals was also considered as important in shaping the active form of metal catalysts [29] .
We have decided to study the hydrodechlorination of CCl 4 carried out over palladium catalysts supported on MgO-MgF 2 carriers, in strong belief that the acido-basic properties of these mixed materials are well correlated with their composition. By increasing the fluorine content of the magnesium oxide fluoride, the Lewis acidity increases whereas the basicity decreases [30] . Therefore, these sites can be tuned over a wide range of MgO-MgF 2 composition thus giving access to optimized catalytic activity and selectivity of these phases as was found for Michael additions [31] . However, during any hydrochlorination reactions which produce HCl the problem becomes more complicated. The reaction leads to a rapid transformation of MgO into MgCl 2 [20, 21] , which has to be considered in description of a working state of the Pd/MgO-MgF 2 catalyst. Full or even partial replacement of MgO by MgCl 2 should also result in an increase in the strength of Lewis acid sites on the surface of the catalyst.

Characterization of prepared MgO-MgF 2 carriers was reported in earlier publications, the "sol-gel" series in [32] and the "carbonate" series in [33] and are recalled in Table 1 . For the "sol-gel" series, the content of magnesium oxide had a considerable effect on the surface area of the MgO-MgF 2 systems, i.e., the surface area of MgO-MgF 2 was seven times larger than that of pure magnesium fluoride and still larger than that of pure MgO. All the "sol-gel" samples were mesoporous with the mean pore diameters ranging from 8 to 18 nm. The size of the pores strongly depended on the composition of the samples and declined with increasing MgO content in MgO-MgF 2 samples. For the "carbonate" series the surface area of the mixed MgO-MgF 2 supports was 2-3 times greater than that of pure MgF 2 . In general, the surface area of mixed supports increased with increasing amount of MgO introduced. The BET surface area of MgO was almost five times greater than that of MgF 2 . All the "carbonate" series samples were mesoporous with the mean pore diameters ranging from 8 to 24 nm. The XRD studies showed the presence of separate crystalline MgO and MgF 2 phases [33] . Table 1 . Support characterization (adapted from [32, 33] The present sample characterization concerns only the Pd-loaded MgO-MgF 2 catalysts, with attention focused on the metal component which is commonly regarded as the active phase in hydrodechlorination reactions. Table 2 shows metal dispersion data based on H 2 and CO chemisorptions. Considering the methodological (pulse vs. static) differences, the results obtained are internally consistent. In addition, the TPHD studies (Table 2) show larger H/Pd ratios for poorly dispersed palladium catalysts, in agreement with known correlations [34] [35] [36] . In the absence of XPS studies, these results would suggest that our palladium material reduced at 380 • C has not been significantly chemically modified by possible interactions with MgO-MgF 2 supports.
However, it is found that introduction of a larger amount of palladium (3%) onto a support characterized by a smaller surface area and lower pore volume (here MgF 2 ) results in the formation of relatively large Pd particles, i.e.,~8 nm (as assessed from CO chemisorption) compared to very small (~2 nm or less) metal particles deposited on MgO and MgO-MgF 2 carriers. It appears that the support of less developed pore structure is not able accommodate larger amounts of dissolved metal precursor during impregation whereas a highly developed pore structure leads to evenly distributed small portions of the precursor. More important is that such large difference in metal dispersion makes a direct comparison of catalytic pattern in these series difficult. Fortunately, smaller differences in surface areas in the "carbonate" series of MgO-MgF 2 supports and lower palladium loadings employed (1% instead of 3%) allowed to prepare the catalysts characterized by comparable metal dispersions ( Table 2) . The results of XRD studies of reduced 3 wt % Pd/MgO-MgF 2 catalysts are presented in Figure 1 . A variety of large diffraction peaks from crystalline phases of MgO and MgF 2 , overlapping reflections from highly dispersed palladium, prevent identification of the metal. Only in the case of 3 wt % Pd/MgF catalysts, the (200) reflection from the Pd (fcc phase) of low intensity would be identified. Rough estimation of Pd crystallite size from that reflection (using the Scherrer formulae) gives 12-15 nm, i.e., the value in a limited agreement with the Pd particle sizes assessed from chemisorption (Table 1) . Accordingly, the diffractograms of the less metal loaded (1 wt %) Pd/MgO-MgF 2 catalysts resemble very much the profiles of unloaded supports [33] , although a very small (200) reflection from palladium was also detected in the profile of the 1 wt % Pd/MgF 2 (XRD data not shown). The results of XRD studies of reduced 3 wt % Pd/MgO-MgF2 catalysts are presented in Figure 1 . A variety of large diffraction peaks from crystalline phases of MgO and MgF2, overlapping reflections from highly dispersed palladium, prevent identification of the metal. Only in the case of 3 wt % Pd/MgF catalysts, the (200) reflection from the Pd (fcc phase) of low intensity would be identified. Rough estimation of Pd crystallite size from that reflection (using the Scherrer formulae) gives 12-15 nm, i.e., the value in a limited agreement with the Pd particle sizes assessed from chemisorption (Table 1) . Accordingly, the diffractograms of the less metal loaded (1 wt %) Pd/MgO-MgF2 catalysts resemble very much the profiles of unloaded supports [33] , although a very small (200) reflection from palladium was also detected in the profile of the 1 wt % Pd/MgF2 (XRD data not shown). 

All tested Pd/MgO-MgF2 catalysts deactivated during the hydrodechlorination of CCl4 at 90 °C, but the character of deactivation varied between different samples.
Reasons for deactivation of HdCl metal catalysts were analyzed in previous publications. They are considered as metal surface chloriding by a liberated HCl [38] [39] [40] [41] , massive deposition of carbonaceous deposits on metal surface [42] [43] [44] [45] and metal sintering caused by long-term operation [46] . It was rather well established that smaller Pd particles (~2 nm or less) deactivate faster than larger Pd crystalllites (~10 nm in size) [36] . Accordingly, our magnesia-containing Pd samples in the sol-gel series which are characterized by very small metal particles (Table 2) showed very pronounced deactivation during kinetic runs and low final activity ( Figure 2 ). On the other hand, the superior catalytic performance, with a small decrease of conversion (from ~100% to ~93%) showed the 3 wt. % Pd/MgF2 catalysts (sol-gel series), characterized by poor metal dispersion. Its counterpart from the carbonate series also exhibited high conversion, but a marked deactivation was observed in this case (from ~100% to ~56%, Figure 2 , inset). Such somewhat different "deactivation" behavior is understood when one considers that the former catalyst was screened at near full conversion level, i.e. the amount of catalyst sample was too large (always ~0.4 g). However, the turnover frequencies for both catalysts at final conversions (after 15-16 h of reaction) are similar (Table 3) , so the apparent difference in the behavior of two 3 wt % Pd/MgO catalysts seen in Figure 2 is easily understood in terms of different metal particle sizes (7.9 vs. 15.6 nm), which differ by factor of ~2. For this metal particle range (~10 nm) one should not expect any special structure-sensitivity, which was usually observed for metal Reasons for deactivation of HdCl metal catalysts were analyzed in previous publications. They are considered as metal surface chloriding by a liberated HCl [38] [39] [40] [41] , massive deposition of carbonaceous deposits on metal surface [42] [43] [44] [45] and metal sintering caused by long-term operation [46] . It was rather well established that smaller Pd particles (~2 nm or less) deactivate faster than larger Pd crystalllites (~10 nm in size) [36] . Accordingly, our magnesia-containing Pd samples in the sol-gel series which are characterized by very small metal particles (Table 2) showed very pronounced deactivation during kinetic runs and low final activity ( Figure 2 ). On the other hand, the superior catalytic performance, with a small decrease of conversion (from~100% to~93%) showed the 3 wt. % Pd/MgF 2 catalysts (sol-gel series), characterized by poor metal dispersion. Its counterpart from the carbonate series also exhibited high conversion, but a marked deactivation was observed in this case (from~100% to~56%, Figure 2 , inset). Such somewhat different "deactivation" behavior is understood when one considers that the former catalyst was screened at near full conversion level, i.e. the amount of catalyst sample was too large (always~0.4 g). However, the turnover frequencies for both catalysts at final conversions (after 15-16 h of reaction) are similar (Table 3) , so the apparent difference in the behavior of two 3 wt % Pd/MgO catalysts seen in Figure 2 is easily understood in terms of different metal particle sizes (7.9 vs. 15.6 nm), which differ by factor of~2. For this metal particle range (~10 nm) one should not expect any special structure-sensitivity, which was usually observed for metal dispersions between 0.2 and 1 [47] . It must be emphasized that the final activity of MgF 2 -supported Pd catalysts was higher than that previously obtained for Pd/Al 2 O 3 [48] and active carbon-supported palladium [49, 50] catalysts. This effect would speak for the beneficial effect of support acidity in electronic modification of palladium surface (creation of Pd σ+ species). On the other hand, very different palladium dispersions in the sol-gel series prevent any speculation about a possible role of support in shaping the catalytic behavior. Therefore, it is concluded that palladium particle size of palladium, which is commonly considered as the catalytically active phase, must be a dominant factor. Thus, to investigate a possible role of support one needs to test palladium catalysts characterized by a similar metal dispersion. As mentioned earlier preparation of the carbonate series of 1 wt % Pd/MgO-MgF2 catalysts, gave the catalysts characterized by similar metal particle sizes (~4 nm) ( Table 2 ). Now the MgF2-supported catalyst showed a poorer performance than its counterparts characterized by 3 wt % metal loading (Figure 3) . Again, such effect would be ascribed to the metal particle size effect. Unexpectedly, the activity time on stream behavior of 1 wt % Pd/MgO was similar to that shown by 1 wt % Pd/MgF2, although larger differences in product selectivity were found (next subsection). On the other hand, the MgO-MgF2 supported catalyst showed an interesting behavior: For a longer time on stream the overall activity was higher and more stable than that for Pd/MgO and Pd/MgF2. This effect will be discussed in the last part of discussion. On the other hand, very different palladium dispersions in the sol-gel series prevent any speculation about a possible role of support in shaping the catalytic behavior. Therefore, it is concluded that palladium particle size of palladium, which is commonly considered as the catalytically active phase, must be a dominant factor. Thus, to investigate a possible role of support one needs to test palladium catalysts characterized by a similar metal dispersion. As mentioned earlier preparation of the carbonate series of 1 wt % Pd/MgO-MgF 2 catalysts, gave the catalysts characterized by similar metal particle sizes (~4 nm) ( Table 2 ). Now the MgF 2 -supported catalyst showed a poorer performance than its counterparts characterized by 3 wt % metal loading (Figure 3) . Again, such effect would be ascribed to the metal particle size effect. Unexpectedly, the activity time on stream behavior of 1 wt % Pd/MgO was similar to that shown by 1 wt % Pd/MgF 2 , although larger differences in product selectivity were found (next subsection). On the other hand, the MgO-MgF 2 supported catalyst showed an interesting behavior: For a longer time on stream the overall activity was higher and more stable than that for Pd/MgO and Pd/MgF 2 . This effect will be discussed in the last part of discussion. [49, 50] catalysts. This effect would speak for the beneficial effect of support acidity in electronic modification of palladium surface (creation of Pd σ+ species). On the other hand, very different palladium dispersions in the sol-gel series prevent any speculation about a possible role of support in shaping the catalytic behavior. Therefore, it is concluded that palladium particle size of palladium, which is commonly considered as the catalytically active phase, must be a dominant factor. Thus, to investigate a possible role of support one needs to test palladium catalysts characterized by a similar metal dispersion. As mentioned earlier preparation of the carbonate series of 1 wt % Pd/MgO-MgF2 catalysts, gave the catalysts characterized by similar metal particle sizes (~4 nm) ( Table 2 ). Now the MgF2-supported catalyst showed a poorer performance than its counterparts characterized by 3 wt % metal loading (Figure 3) . Again, such effect would be ascribed to the metal particle size effect. Unexpectedly, the activity time on stream behavior of 1 wt % Pd/MgO was similar to that shown by 1 wt % Pd/MgF2, although larger differences in product selectivity were found (next subsection). On the other hand, the MgO-MgF2 supported catalyst showed an interesting behavior: For a longer time on stream the overall activity was higher and more stable than that for Pd/MgO and Pd/MgF2. This effect will be discussed in the last part of discussion. 
We consider that chlorine-free compounds (i.e., hydrocarbons) are the desired products of CCl 4 hydrodechlorination because chloroform, a previously desired product, is classified as an extremely hazardous substance. In this respect all tested here MgF 2 -supported palladium catalysts showed the best results, as indicated in Table 3 , where one column aggregates C 2 -C 5 hydrocarbon products. A higher activation energy for MgO-supported palladium would suggest that the removal of surface chlorine (as HCl) is more difficult than for the MgF 2 -supported metal. This comparison clearly confirms the suitability of MgF 2 -supported metal catalysts for HdCl reactions [14, 20, 21, [24] [25] [26] .
The used samples of catalysts were investigated by XRD, temperature programmed hydrogenation of post-reaction deposits and IR spectroscopy of adsorbed pyridine (on selected samples). The results shown in Figures 4-8 and Table 4 allow to make cautious speculations about the working state of HdCl catalysts. X-ray results (Figures 4 and 5) indicate that palladium, when it is detectable in the diffractograms, is largely transformed into a PdC x phase. Such transformation is often observed for HdCl reactions carried out over Pd catalysts [49, 51] and here confirmed for MgF 2 -supported Pd catalyst used in the CCl 4 reaction. This phenomenon may decide about the time scale behavior of product selectivity pattern because at an initial period of reaction palladium acts as carbon sink decreasing the selectivity to methane [47, 51] .
Figures 4 and 5 showed big changes for the magnesium-containing support component. Direct transformation of MgO into MgCl 2 is also not unexpected, as a similar effect was observed for Pt/MgO catalyst by Choi et al. [20] . However, a closer inspection of diffractograms allows estimation of the extent of transformation and, hopefully, the state of crystallinity of formed MgCl 2 . Figure 4 shows that magnesia in 3 wt % Pd/MgO catalyst is only partly transformed into MgCl 2 . In MgO-MgF 2 supported 3% Pd loaded catalysts the extent of transformation appears more marked. Figure 5 shows analogous data for the carbonate series of Pd catalysts. Here the degree of MgO → MgCl 2 transformation is still more pronounced. For the 1 wt % loaded catalysts the presence of MgCl 2 and MgO phases is only slightly marked (for 1 wt % Pd/MgO) or even completely invisible for 1 wt % Pd/37MgO-63MgF 2 catalyst. These observations along with much broader reflections from the MgCl 2 in the 3 wt % Pd/MgO catalyst that the formed MgCl 2 phase has a tendency to spread out over the catalyst surface. catalyst. These observations along with much broader reflections from the MgCl2 in the 3 wt % Pd/MgO catalyst that the formed MgCl2 phase has a tendency to spread out over the catalyst surface. Temperature programed hydrogenation of post-reaction deposits presented in Figures 6 and 7 shows that all tested catalysts possess different amounts of carbon and chlorine. MgF2-supported catalysts are relatively deprived of chlorine: only some small amount of HCl is liberated at low temperature (≤200 °C), suggesting reduction of chloride associated with the palladium. A nonappearance of high temperature HCl evolution (observed for MgO-containing catalysts) indicates lack of chlorine on the surface of MgF2 (Figure 7) . This, in turn, suggests no changes in the acidity of this catalyst which would be associated with chlorine. However, CH4 evolution from this catalyst was quite pronounced (Figure 6 ) but still not as high as for other catalysts, which we believe is a primary reason of catalyst deactivation in HdCl reactions. Interestingly, Figure 7 shows no chlorine liberation for Pd/MgO at a low temperature region. We believe that it is not due to a lack of chlorine on palladium surface but rather because the surface of palladium is effectively blocked by an impermeable coating by MgCl2, [52] or simply closed in a porous structure by MgCl2 "stoppers". As it was suggested earlier, a decreased crystallinity of MgCl2 in this catalyst allows assumption that MgCl2 is either spread out over the support or a topochemical reaction MgO-MgCl2 [52] would lead to dramatic changes in the support texture, with possible burial of Pd particles. The MgO-MgF2 supported catalysts showed catalyst. These observations along with much broader reflections from the MgCl2 in the 3 wt % Pd/MgO catalyst that the formed MgCl2 phase has a tendency to spread out over the catalyst surface. Temperature programed hydrogenation of post-reaction deposits presented in Figures 6 and 7 shows that all tested catalysts possess different amounts of carbon and chlorine. MgF2-supported catalysts are relatively deprived of chlorine: only some small amount of HCl is liberated at low temperature (≤200 °C), suggesting reduction of chloride associated with the palladium. A nonappearance of high temperature HCl evolution (observed for MgO-containing catalysts) indicates lack of chlorine on the surface of MgF2 (Figure 7) . This, in turn, suggests no changes in the acidity of this catalyst which would be associated with chlorine. However, CH4 evolution from this catalyst was quite pronounced (Figure 6 ) but still not as high as for other catalysts, which we believe is a primary reason of catalyst deactivation in HdCl reactions. Interestingly, Figure 7 shows no chlorine liberation for Pd/MgO at a low temperature region. We believe that it is not due to a lack of chlorine on palladium surface but rather because the surface of palladium is effectively blocked by an impermeable coating by MgCl2, [52] or simply closed in a porous structure by MgCl2 "stoppers". As it was suggested earlier, a decreased crystallinity of MgCl2 in this catalyst allows assumption that MgCl2 is either spread out over the support or a topochemical reaction MgO-MgCl2 [52] would lead to dramatic changes in the support texture, with possible burial of Pd particles. The MgO-MgF2 supported catalysts showed Temperature programed hydrogenation of post-reaction deposits presented in Figures 6 and 7 shows that all tested catalysts possess different amounts of carbon and chlorine. MgF 2 -supported catalysts are relatively deprived of chlorine: only some small amount of HCl is liberated at low temperature (≤200 • C), suggesting reduction of chloride associated with the palladium. A nonappearance of high temperature HCl evolution (observed for MgO-containing catalysts) indicates lack of chlorine on the surface of MgF 2 ( Figure 7) . This, in turn, suggests no changes in the acidity of this catalyst which would be associated with chlorine. However, CH 4 evolution from this catalyst was quite pronounced (Figure 6 ) but still not as high as for other catalysts, which we believe is a primary reason of catalyst deactivation in HdCl reactions. Interestingly, Figure 7 shows no chlorine liberation for Pd/MgO at a low temperature region. We believe that it is not due to a lack of chlorine on palladium surface but rather because the surface of palladium is effectively blocked by an impermeable coating by MgCl 2 , [52] or simply closed in a porous structure by MgCl 2 "stoppers". As it was suggested earlier, a decreased crystallinity of MgCl 2 in this catalyst allows assumption that MgCl 2 is either spread out over the support or a topochemical reaction MgO-MgCl 2 [52] would lead to dramatic changes in the support texture, with possible burial of Pd particles. The MgO-MgF 2 supported catalysts showed both the low and high temperature HCl evolution, evidencing that both MgCl 2 spreading as well as textural changes would be less dramatic for mixed MgO-MgF 2 systems, where a part of palladium species is deposited on MgF 2 . It looks like the very huge HCl evolution from Pd/MgO occurred at very high temperature largely results from reduction of MgCl 2 .
both the low and high temperature HCl evolution, evidencing that both MgCl2 spreading as well as textural changes would be less dramatic for mixed MgO-MgF2 systems, where a part of palladium species is deposited on MgF2. It looks like the very huge HCl evolution from Pd/MgO occurred at very high temperature largely results from reduction of MgCl2. both the low and high temperature HCl evolution, evidencing that both MgCl2 spreading as well as textural changes would be less dramatic for mixed MgO-MgF2 systems, where a part of palladium species is deposited on MgF2. It looks like the very huge HCl evolution from Pd/MgO occurred at very high temperature largely results from reduction of MgCl2. The results of IR spectra of adsorbed pyridine ( Figure 8a and b and Table 4 ) allow to confirm the presence of Lewis acid centers on the surface of all tested catalysts. The analysis of population and strength distribution of these centers was carried out by considering the absorbance of 1446 cm −1 band, associated with pyridine coordinated to the Lewis acid center. The largest amounts of pyridine left Table 4 ) allow to confirm the presence of Lewis acid centers on the surface of all tested catalysts. The analysis of population and strength distribution of these centers was carried out by considering the absorbance of 1446 cm −1 band, associated with pyridine coordinated to the Lewis acid center. The largest amounts of pyridine left on the surface after desorption at 150 • C were found for used 1 wt % Pd/37MgO-67MgF 2 catalyst. The number of such centers was nearly three times higher than the respective value for the reduced catalyst. However, these centers are rather weak because after desorption at 200 • C only 28.5% of them still bind pyridine. On the other hand, at analogous conditions, as far as 66% of pyridine is left on the reduced catalyst. A quantitative parameter characterizing the strength of acid centers is the ratio of the 1446 cm −1 absorbance after pyridine desorption at 300 and 200 • C. Table 4 displays that the highest value of this parameter (0.64) showed the reduced 1 wt % Pd/37MgO-67MgF 2 catalyst, whereas after HdCl it decreased to 0.26. A similar value was found for 1 wt % Pd/MgO after reaction (0.25). Therefore, it appears that during the HdCl reaction the strongest acid centers are neutralized with simultaneous formation of weak acid centers. It would be worthwile to investigate the acid strength evolution in the course of reaction and combine it with the catalytic performance (activity and selectivity). on the surface after desorption at 150 °C were found for used 1 wt % Pd/37MgO-67MgF2 catalyst.
The number of such centers was nearly three times higher than the respective value for the reduced catalyst. However, these centers are rather weak because after desorption at 200 °C only 28.5% of them still bind pyridine. On the other hand, at analogous conditions, as far as 66% of pyridine is left on the reduced catalyst. A quantitative parameter characterizing the strength of acid centers is the ratio of the 1446 cm -1 absorbance after pyridine desorption at 300 and 200 °C. Table 4 displays that the highest value of this parameter (0.64) showed the reduced 1 wt % Pd/37MgO-67MgF2 catalyst, whereas after HdCl it decreased to 0.26. A similar value was found for 1 wt % Pd/MgO after reaction (0.25). Therefore, it appears that during the HdCl reaction the strongest acid centers are neutralized with simultaneous formation of weak acid centers. It would be worthwile to investigate the acid strength evolution in the course of reaction and combine it with the catalytic performance (activity and selectivity). In summary, the role of support acidity is quite complex. On the one hand, a definite, although not very high Lewis acidity of MgF2 is beneficial for shaping high activity of palladium catalysts. The MgO-MgF2 support characterized by stronger Lewis acidity than MgF2 contributes to very good catalytic activity for a relatively long reaction period (~5 h) but subsequent neutralization of stronger acid centers (by coking) eliminates them from the catalytic amphitheater. On the other hand, the role of acidity evolution, which takes place when basic supports (like MgO) are chlorided during HdCl reactions, is difficult to assess because different events associated with distribution of chlorided support species, leading to partial or even full blocking of the surface of palladium, which plays the role of active phase in HdCl reactions. Therefore, a unique disposal of straightforward tuneability of acido-basic properties of MgO-MgF2 of varied composition is weakened by the interaction with chloride species. It must recalled that these sites, tuned over a wide range of MgO-MgF2 composition, gave an unproblematic access to optimized catalytic activity and selectivity of these phases for the Michael addition of 2-methylcyclohexane-1,3-dione to methyl vinyl ketone [31] . By increasing the In summary, the role of support acidity is quite complex. On the one hand, a definite, although not very high Lewis acidity of MgF 2 is beneficial for shaping high activity of palladium catalysts. The MgO-MgF 2 support characterized by stronger Lewis acidity than MgF 2 contributes to very good catalytic activity for a relatively long reaction period (~5 h) but subsequent neutralization of stronger acid centers (by coking) eliminates them from the catalytic amphitheater. On the other hand, the role of acidity evolution, which takes place when basic supports (like MgO) are chlorided during HdCl reactions, is difficult to assess because different events associated with distribution of chlorided support species, leading to partial or even full blocking of the surface of palladium, which plays the role of active phase in HdCl reactions. Therefore, a unique disposal of straightforward tuneability of acido-basic properties of MgO-MgF 2 of varied composition is weakened by the interaction with chloride species. It must recalled that these sites, tuned over a wide range of MgO-MgF 2 composition, gave an unproblematic access to optimized catalytic activity and selectivity of these phases for the Michael addition of 2-methylcyclohexane-1,3-dione to methyl vinyl ketone [31] . By increasing the fluorine content of the magnesium oxide fluoride, the Lewis acidity increases whereas the basicity decreases [30] . This correlation is also compatible with recent results on toluene hydrogenation over Ir/MgO-MgF 2 catalysts [53] , where the best iridium catalysts were supported on MgF 2 -rich carriers characterized by a relatively low surface basicity.

Two series of MgO-MgF 2 supports were prepared. The first one was synthesized by the sol-gel method starting from magnesium methoxide treated with an aqueous solution of hydrofluoric acid, as described in [32] . The amount of HF solution was adjusted to obtain 40 and 70 mol % MgF 2 in the samples. The resulting dense gels of MgO-MgF 2 were subjected to ageing for 40 h at RT, and then to drying at 80 • C for 3 h. The dried samples of this "sol-gel" series were calcined for 4 h at 400 • C and sieved (selected fraction 0.25-0.5 mm). The MgF 2 support was obtained by the sol-gel method from Mg(OCH 3 ) 2 and anhydrous HF (48.8% HF in methanol, Sigma-Aldrich, Polska, Poznań, Poland) in a way analogous to the above described synthesis for MgO-MgF 2 , but under rigorously anhydrous conditions. MgO was obtained by the sol-gel method by hydrolysis of magnesium methoxide (120 cm 3 of 0.5 M solution) in water and treated similarly to MgO-MgF 2 . Another series of MgO-MgF 2 supports of different MgF 2 contents (0, 60% and 100%) were obtained in the reaction of basic magnesium carbonate (4MgCO 3 ·Mg(OH) 2 ·5H 2 O) powder with controlled amounts of 40 wt % aqueous solution of HF, as described in [33] . The resulting dense gels of this "carbonate" series were aged for 40 h at room temperature under stirring, followed by drying at 80 • C for 24 h and calcining under air flow at 500 • C for 4 h. The MgO support was obtained by decomposition of 4MgCO 3 ·Mg(OH) 2 ·5H 2 O at 500 • C for 4 h.
The 3 wt % Pd/MgO-MgF 2 catalysts were prepared by impregnation of both series of MgO-MgF 2 supports with an acetone solution of palladium acetate using the incipient wetness technique. The 1 wt % Pd-loaded catalysts were prepared by wet impregnation of the "carbonate" supports with a methanol solution of palladium acetate. After impregnation and drying (at 80 • C for 20 h), the resulting solids were transferred to glass-stoppered bottles and kept in a desiccator. Prior to chemisorption and reaction studies, all catalysts were reduced in flowing 20% H 2 /Ar (50 cm 3 /min), ramping the temperature from 20 to 380 • C (at 8 • C/min), and kept at 380 • C for 2 h.
The catalysts were characterized by H 2 and CO chemisorption, XRD, temperature-programmed methods and IR spectroscopy of adsorbed pyridine. Irreversible uptake of hydrogen was measured in a pulse method system at 70 • C, to avoid the formation of β-PdH. CO adsorption was measured at 35 • C in a static system, using a double isotherm method (ASAP 2020 from Micromeritics). H ad /Pd and CO ad /Pd ratios were taken as measures of metal dispersion. Prior to characterization, the catalysts were pretreated in the same way as before kinetic experiments (next subsection), i.e., with the final reduction at 380 • C for 2 h. Reduced and post-reaction catalysts were investigated by X-ray diffractometry (PANalytical Empyrean, Almelo, The Netherlands, with Ni-filtered CuK α radiation and sample spinner).
After H 2 chemisorption, the samples were cooled to room temperature and subjected to a temperature programmed study in 10% H 2 /Ar flow, ramping the temperature from 20 to 150 • C, at 8 • C/min. Since the samples had already been reduced, the aim of such experiments was to monitor hydrogen evolution during decomposition of Pd hydride, in the temperature programmed hydride decomposition (TPHD). For details, see [34] . Post-reaction catalyst samples were investigated by temperature programmed hydrogenation (TPH-MS). TPH-MS runs were carried out in a flowing
There are two main sorts of solution concepts for strategic games: equilibrium concepts and what might be called "effective" concepts. One interpretation of the equilibrium concepts, for example Nash equilibrium, tacitly presupposes that a game is played repeatedly (see, e.g. [13, page 14] ). Thus the standard condition for Nash equilibrium in terms of the knowledge or beliefs of the players [3] -the so-called "epistemic analysis" of Nash equilibrium -includes a requirement that players know the other players' strategy choices. Consider the left-hand game in Figure 1 , in which each player has two choices L and R and both players get payoff of 1 if they coordinate, and 0 otherwise. Then there are two Nash equilibria 1 : both play L or both play R. But this does not translate by itself into an effective strategy for either player reasoning in isolation, without some exogenous information.
In contrast, effective solution concepts, for example the iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies, are compatible with such a "oneshot" interpretation of the game. Thus the epistemic analysis of the iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies does not require that the players know each other's strategy choice.
A strategy s i is strictly dominated if there is an alternative strategy t i such that no matter what the opponent does, t i is (strictly) better for i than s i . Say that a player is sd-rational if he never plays a strategy that he believes to be strictly dominated. What the iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies does in general require, see [4] , is then that players have common true belief that each other is rational, that is: they are rational, believe that all are rational, believe that all believe that all are rational, etc.
In the right-hand game in Figure 1 , the column player, on first looking at her choices L or R is, superficially, in the same situation as before: choose L and risk the opponent playing D or choice R and risk the opponent playing U . However, this time the row player can immediately dismiss playing D on the grounds that U will always be better, no matter what the column player does. So if the column player knows (or believes) this, then he cannot rationally play R, and so must play L.
In this paper we study the logical form of epistemic characterisation results of this second kind, so we give formal proof-theoretic principles to justify some given effective or algorithmic process in terms of common belief of some form of rationality. We will introduce two formal languages. One, L O , is a first-order language, that can be used to define 'optimality conditions'. Avoiding playing a strictly dominated strategy is an example of an 'optimality condition'. Another one is choosing a best response.
However, as observed in [2] for all such notions there are two versions: 'local' and 'global'. Notice that in our informal description of when s i is strictly dominated by t i we did not specify where i is allowed to choose alternative strategies from. In particular, since we are thinking of an iterated procedure, if t i has been eliminated already then it would seem unreasonable to say that i should consider it. That intuition yields the local definition; the global definition states the opposite: that player i should always consider his original strategy set from the full game when looking to see if a strategy is dominated.
A motivation for looking at global versions of optimality notions is that they are often mathematically better behaved. On finite games the iterations for various local and global versions coincide [1], but on infinite games they can differ. In a nutshell: an optimality condition φ i for player i is global if i does not 'forget', during the iterated elimination process, what strategies he has available in the whole game. The distinction is clarified in the respective definitions in L O .
An optimality condition φ induces an optimality operator O φ on the complete lattice of restrictions (roughly: the subgames) of a given game. Eliminating non-φ-optimal strategies can be seen as the calculation of a fixpoint of the corresponding operator O φ . Furthermore, common belief is characterised as a fixpoint (cf. Note 3 below). Viewed from the appropriate level of abstraction, in terms of fixpoints of operators, this connection between common belief of rationality and the iterated elimination of nonoptimal strategies becomes clear.
We define a language L ν that describes things from this higher level of abstraction. Each optimality condition defines a corresponding notion of rationality, which means playing a strategy that one believes to be φ-optimal. L ν is a modal fixpoint language with modalities for belief and optimality, and so can express connections between optimality, rationality and (common) belief.
We say that an operator O on an arbitrary lattice (D, ⊆) is monotonic when for all A, B ∈ D, if A ⊆ B then O(A) ⊆ O(B). The global versions of relevant optimality operators, in particular of the operators corresponding to the best response and strict dominance, are monotonic. This is immediately verifiable in L O by observing that the relevant definition is positive.
Our first result is a syntactic proof of the following result, where φ is a monotonic optimality condition: 2 Theorem 1 Common true belief of φ-rationality entails all played strategies survive the iterated elimination of non-φ-optimal strategies.
Although this theorem relies on a rule for fixpoint calculi that is only sound for monotonic operators, the semantics of the language L ν allows also for arbitrary contracting operators, i.e. such that for all A, O(A) ⊆ A. We are therefore able to look at what more is needed in order to justify the following statement (cf. [4, Proposition 3.10]), where gbr-rationality means avoiding avoiding strategies one believes to be never best responses in the global sense:
Theorem 2 (Imp) Common true belief of gbr-rationality implies that the players will choose only strategies that survive the iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies.
This theorem connects a global notion of gbr-rationality with a local one, referred to in the iterated elimination operator. Our language allows for arbitrary contracting operators, and their fixpoints to be formed, and we exhibit one sound rule connecting the resulting fixpoints with monotonic fixpoints.
Our theorems hold for arbitrary games, and the resulting potentially transfinite iterations of the elimination process. The syntactic approach clarifies the logical underpinnings of the epistemic analysis. It shows that the use of transfinite iterations can be naturally captured in L ν , at least when the relevant operators are monotonic, by a single inference rule that involves greatest fixpoints.
The relevance of monotonicity in the context of epistemic analysis of finite strategic games has already been pointed out in [5] , where the connection is also noted between the iterated elimination of non-optimal strategies and the calculation of the fixpoint of the corresponding operator.
To our knowledge, although several languages have been suggested for reasoning about strategic games (e.g. [7] ), none use explicit fixpoints (except, as we mentioned, for some suggestions in [5] ) and none use arbitrary optimality operators.
Therefore they are not appropriate for reasoning at the level of abstraction that we suggest when studying the epistemic foundations of these "effective" solution concepts. For example while [7, Section 13] does provide some analysis of the logical form of the argument that common knowledge of one kind of rationality implies not playing strategies that are strictly dominated, the fixpoint reasoning is done at the meta-level. What [7] provides is a proof schema, that shows how, for any finite game, and any natural number n, to give a proof that common knowledge of rationality entails not playing strategies that are eliminated in n rounds of elimination of non-optimal strategies.
The more general and elegant reasoning principle is captured by using fixpoint operators and optimality operators. Another important advan-tage to our approach is that we are not restricted in our analysis to finite games. This means in particular that our logical analysis covers the mixed extension of any finite game.
Our use of transfinite iterations is motivated by the original finding of [12] , where a two-player game is constructed for which the ω 0 (the first infinite ordinal) and ω 0 + 1 iterations of the rationalizability operator of [6] differ.
A strategic game is a tuple (T 1 , . . . , T n , < 1 , . . . , < n ), where {1, . . . , n} are the players and each T i is player i's set of strategies, and < i is player i's preference relation, which is a total linear order over the set of strategy profiles T = n i=1 T i . Note that we assume arbitrary games, rather than restricting to games in which T is finite. To depict games it is sometimes easier, as we did in Figure 1 , to write down a number for the players' "payoffs", rather than just a preference ordering. We use some standard notation from game theory, writing s −i for (s 1 , . . . s i−1 , s i+1 , . . . s n ) and (s i , t −i ) for the strategy profile (t 1 , . . . t i−1 , s i , t i+1 , . . . s n ), as well as S −i for j =i S j . A restriction of the game (T 1 , . . . , T n , < 1 , . . . , < n ) is a sequence S = (S 1 , . . . , S n ) with S i ⊆ T i for all players i, i.e. a (possibly empty) subgame in which the payoff information is left out.
The language we use for specifying optimality conditions is a firstorder language, with variables V = {x, y, z, . . .}, a monadic predicate C, a constant o and a family of n ternary relation symbols · ≥ i · ·, where i ∈ [1..n]. So L O is given by the following inductive definition:
We use the standard abbreviations → and ∨, further abbreviate ¬a
An optimality model (G, G ′ , s) is a triple consisting of a strategic game G = (T 1 , . . . , T n , < 1 , . . . , < n ), a restriction G ′ of G, and a strategy profile s ∈ T . G will be used to interpret the predicate C, and s will be the interpretation of o. An assignment for (G, G ′ , s) is a function α assigning a strategy profile in T to each variable, and s to o. The ternary satisfaction relation |= between optimality models, assignments and formulas of L O is defined inductively as follows, where α is an assignment for (G, G ′ , s), and |= the complement of |=:
A variable x occurs free in φ if it is not under the scope of a quantifier ∃x; a formula is closed if it has no free variables. An optimality condition for player i is a closed L O -formula in which all the occurrences of the atomic formulas a ≥ j c b are with j equal to i. Intuitively, an optimality condition φ i for player i is a way of specifying what it means for i's strategy in o to be an 'OK' choice for i given that i's opponents will play according to C −i and that i's alternatives are C i .
In particular, we are interested in the following optimality conditions:
The optimality conditions listed define some fundamental notions from game theory: lsd i says that o i is not locally strictly dominated in the context of C; gsd i says that o i is not globally strictly dominated in the context of C; and gbr i says that o i is globally a best response in the context of C.
The distinction between local and global properties, studied further in [2] , is clarified below. It important for us here because the global versions, in contrast to the local ones, satisfy a syntactic property to be defined shortly.
First, as an illustration of the difference between gbr i and gsd i , consider the game in Figure 2 . Call that game H, with the row player 1 and the column player 2. Then we have
We say that an optimality condition φ i is positive when any subformula of the form C(z), with z any variable, occurs under the scope of an even number of negation signs (¬). Note that both gbr i and gsd i are positive, while lsd i is not. As we will see in a moment, positive optimality conditions induce monotonic optimality operators, and monotonicity will be the condition required of optimality operators in Theorem 1 relating common knowledge of φ-rationality with the iterated elimination of non-φ strategies.
Henceforth let G = (T 1 , . . . , T n , < 1 , . . . , < n ) be a fixed strategic game. Recall that a restriction of the game G is a sequence S = (S 1 , . . . , S n ) with S i ⊆ T i for all players i. We will interpret optimality conditions as operators on the lattice of the restrictions of a game ordered by component-wise set inclusion:
Given a sequence φ giving an optimality condition φ i for each player i, we introduce an optimality operator O φ defined by
Consider now an operator O on an arbitrary complete lattice (D, ⊆) with largest element ⊤. We say that an element S ∈ D is a fixpoint of
We define by transfinite induction a sequence of elements O α of D, for all ordinals α:
We
Not all operators have fixpoints, but the monotonic and contracting ones (already defined in the introduction) do: Proof. For (i), it is enough to know that for every set D there is an ordinal α such that there is no injective function from α to D.
Note that the operators O φ are by definition contracting, and hence all have outcomes. Furthermore, it is straightforward to verify that if φ i is positive for all players i, then O φ is monotonic.
The following classic result due to [14] also forms the basis of the soundness of some part of the proof systems we consider. 3 
where νO is the largest fixpoint of O.
We shall need the following lemma, which is crucial in connecting iterations of arbitrary contracting operators with those of monotonic operators. It also ensures the soundness of one of the proof rules we will introduce.
Proof. By Note 1(i) the outcomes of O 1 and O 2 exist. We prove now by transfinite induction that for all α
from which the claim follows, since by Note 1(iii) we have
By the definition of the iterations we only need to consider the induction step for a successor ordinal. So suppose the claim holds for some α.
The second assumption implies that O 1 is monotonic. We have the following string of inclusions and equalities, where the first inclusion holds by the induction hypothesis and monotonicity of O 1 and the second one by the first assumption
Recall that G is a game (T 1 , . . . , T n , P 1 , . . . , P n ). A belief model for G is a tuple (Ω, s 1 , . . . , s n , P 1 , . . . , P n ), with Ω a non-empty set of 'states', and for each player i, s i : Ω → T i and P i : Ω → 2 Ω . The P i 's are possibility correspondences cf. [4] . The idea of a possibility correspondence P i is that if the actual state is ω then P i (ω) is the set of states that i considers possible: those that i considers might be the actual state. Subsets of Ω are called events. A player i believes an event E if that event holds in every state that i considers possible. Thus at the state ω,
Given some event E we write G E to denote the restriction of G determined by E:
In the rest of this section we present a formal language L ν that will be interpreted over belief models. To begin, we consider the simpler language L, the formulas of which are defined inductively as follows, where i ∈ [1..n]:
with φ i an optimality condition for player i. We abbreviate the formula i∈[1..n] rat φ i to rat φ , i∈[1..n] i ψ to ψ and i∈[1.
Formulas of L are interpreted as events in (i.e. as subsets of the domain of) belief models. Given a belief model (Ω, s 1 , . . . , s n , P 1 , . . . , P n ) for G, we define the interpretation function · : L → P(Ω) as follows:
gives the set of states that i considers possible at ω, so rat φ i is the event that player i is φ i -rational, since it means that i's strategy is optimal according to φ i in the context that the player considers it possible that he is in. The semantic clause for i was mentioned at the begin of this section and is familiar from epistemic logic:
i ψ is the event that player i believes the event ψ . O φ i ψ is the event that player i's strategy is optimal according to the optimality condition φ i , in the context of the restriction G ψ .
Then clearly rat φ is the event that every player i is φ i -rational; O φ ψ is the event that every player's strategy is φ i -optimal in the context of the restriction G ψ ; and ψ is the event that every player believes the event ψ to hold.
Although L can express some connections between our formal definitions of optimality rationality and beliefs, it could be made more expressive. The language could be extended with, for example, atoms s i expressing the event that the strategy s i is chosen. This choice is made for example in [7] , where modal languages for reasoning about games are defined. The language we introduce is not parametrised by the game, and consequently can unproblematically be used to reason about games with arbitrary strategy sets.
We will use our language to talk about fixpoint notions: common belief and iterated elimination of non-optimal strategies. Let us therefore explain what is meant by common belief . Common belief of an event E is the event that all players believe E, all players believe that they believe E, all players believe that they believe that. . . , and so on. Formally, we define CB(E), the event that E is commonly believed, inductively:
Notice that B 1 (E) is the event that everybody believes that E (indeed, we have B 1 ψ = ψ ), B 2 (E) is the event that everybody believes that everybody believes that E, etc.
'Common belief' is called 'common knowledge' when for all players i and all states ω ∈ Ω, we have ω ∈ P i (ω). In such a case the players have never ruled out the current state, and so it is legitimate to interpret i ψ as 'i knows that ψ'.
Both common knowledge and common belief are known to have equivalent characterisations as fixpoints, and we will exploit this below in defining them in the modal fixpoint language which we now specify.
We extend the vocabulary of L with a single set variable denoted by X and the contracting fixpoint operator νX. (The corresponding extension of first-order logic by the dual, inflationary fixpoint operator µX was first studied in [8] .) Modulo one caveat the resulting language L ν is defined as follows:
The caveat is the following:
-φ must be ν-free, which means that it does not contain any occurrences of the νX operator.
This restriction is not necessary but simplifies matters and is sufficient for our considerations.
To extend the interpretation function · to L ν , we must keep track of the variable X. Therefore we first extend the function · : L → P(Ω) to a function · | · : L ν × P(Ω) → P(Ω) by padding it with a dummy argument. We give one clause as an example:
We use this extra argument in the semantic clause for the variable X:
Those formulas whose semantics we have so far given define operators. More specifically, for each of them ψ | · is an operator on the powerset P(Ω) of Ω. We use this to define the clause for νX:
When X does not occur free in ψ, we have ψ | E = ψ | F for any events E and F , so in these cases we can write simply ψ . Note that νX.ψ is well-defined since for all E we have ψ ∧ X | E = ψ | E ∩ X | E ⊆ E, so the operator ψ ∧ X | · is contracting.
We say that a formula ψ of L ν is positive in X when each occurrence of X in ψ is under the scope of an even number of negation signs (¬), and under the scope of an optimality operator O φ i only if φ i is positive.
Note 2. When ψ is positive, the operator ψ | · is monotonic.
Then by Tarski's Fixpoint Theorem and Note 1(iii) we can use the following alternative definition of νX.ψ in terms of post-fixpoints:
Let us mention some properties the language L ν can express. First notice that common belief is definable in L ν using the νX operator. An analogous characterization of common knowledge is in [9, Section 11.5]. From now on we abbreviate the formula νX. (X ∧ ψ) with ψ a formula of L to * ψ. So L ν can define common belief. Moreover, as the following observation shows, it can also define the iterated elimination of non-optimal strategies. Note 4. In the game determined by the event νX.O φ X , every player selects a strategy which survives the iterated elimination of non-φ-optimal strategies.
Proof. It follows immediately from the following equivalence, which is obtained by unpacking the relevant definitions:
Consider the following formula:
By Notes 3 and 4, we see that (1) states that: true common belief that the players are φ-rational entails that each player selects a strategy that survives the iterated elimination of non-φ-optimal strategies.
In the rest of this section we will discuss a simple proof system in which we can derive (1). We will use an axiom and rule of inference for the fixpoint operator taken from [11] and one axiom for rationality analogous to the one called in [7] an "implicit definition" of rationality. We give these in Figure 3 , where, crucially, ψ is positive in X, and all the φ i 's are positive. We denote here by ψ[X → χ] the formula obtained from ψ by substituting each occurrence of the variable X with the formula χ. Assuming given some standard proof rules for propositional reasoning, we add the axioms and rule given in Figure 3 to obtain the system P.
Axiom schemata
χ → νX.ψ νInd Fig. 3 . Proof system P A formula is a theorem of a proof system if it is derivable from the axioms and rules of inference. An L ν -formula ψ is valid if for every belief model (Ω, . . .) for G we have ψ = Ω. We now establish the soundness of the proof system P, that is, that its theorems are valid.
Lemma 2. The proof system P is sound.
Proof. We show the validity of the axiom ratDis:
Let (Ω, s 1 , . . . , s n , P i , . . . , P n ) be a belief model for G. We must show that rat φ → ( χ → O φ χ) = Ω. That is, that for any χ the inclusion rat φ ∩ χ ⊆ O φ χ holds. So take some ω ∈ rat φ ∩ χ . Then for every i ∈ [1..n], φ i (s i (ω), G P i (ω) ), and P i (ω) ⊆ χ . So by monotonicity of φ i , φ i (s i (ω), G χ ), i.e. ω ∈ O φ i χ as required.
The axioms νDis and the rule νInd were introduced in [11] ; they formalise, respectively, the following two consequences of Tarski's Fixpoint Theorem concerning a monotonic operator F :
Next, we establish the already announced claim. Theorem 1. The formula (1) is a theorem of the proof system P.
Proof. The following formulas are instances of the axioms ratDis (with ψ := * rat φ ∧ rat φ ) and νDis (with ψ := (X ∧ rat φ )) respectively:
Putting these two together via some propositional logic, we obtain
which is of the right shape to apply the rule νInd (with χ := * rat φ ∧rat φ and ψ := O φ X). We then obtain
which is precisely the formula (1).
It is interesting to note that no axioms or rules for the modalities or O were needed in order to derive (1), other than those connecting them with rationality. In particular, no introspection is required on the part of the players, nor indeed is the
In the language L ν , the rat φ i are in effect propositional constants. We might instead define them in terms of the i and O φ i modalities but to this end we would need to extend the language L ν . One way to do this is to use a quantified modal language, allowing quantifiers over set variables, so extending L ν by allowing formulas of the form ∀Xϕ. Such quantified modal logics are studied in [10] . It is straightforward to extend the semantics to this larger class of formulas:
In the resulting language each rat φ i constant is definable by a formula of this second-order language:
The following observation then shows correctness of this definition. To complete our proof-theoretic analysis we augment the proof system P with the following proof rule where we assume that χ is positive in X, but where ψ is an arbitrary ν-free L ν -formula:
χ → ψ νX.χ → νX.ψ Incl
The soundness of this rule is a direct consequence of Lemma 1.
To formalize the statement Imp we need two optimality conditions, gbr i and lsd i .
To link the proof systems for the languages L O and L ν we add the following proof rule, where each φ i and ψ i is an optimality condition in L O , and O φ X → O ψ X is a formula of L ν .
The soundness of this rule is a direct consequence of the semantics of the formulas O φ X and O ψ X. We denote the system obtained from P by adding to it the above two proof rules and standard first-order logic rules concerning the formulas in the language L O , like ∃y ∀xφ ∀x ∃yφ by R. We can now formalize the statement Imp as follows:
(rat gbr ∧ * rat gbr ) → νx.O lsd x.
The following result then shows that this formula can be formally derived in the considered proof system. Theorem 2. The formula (5) is a theorem of the proof system R.
Proof. The properties gbr i are monotonic, so the following implication is an instance of (1):
(rat gbr ∧ * rat gbr ) → νx.O gbr x.
Further, since the implication gbr i → lsd i holds, we get by the Link rule νx.O gbr x → νx.O lsd x, from which (5) follows.
Corollary 2. The formula (5) is valid.
We have studied the logical form of epistemic characterisation results, for arbitrary (including infinite) strategic games, of the form "common knowledge of φ-rationality entails playing according to the iterated elimination of non-φ ′ properties". A main contribution of this work is in revealing, by giving syntactic proofs, the reasoning principles involved in two cases: firstly when φ = φ ′ (Theorem 1), and secondly when φ entails φ ′ (Theorem 2). In each case the result holds when φ is monotonic. The language L ν that we used to formalise this reasoning is to our knowledge novel in combining optimality operators with fixpoint notions. Such a combination is natural when studying such characterisation results, since common knowledge and iterated elimination are both fixpoint notions. The language L ν is parametric in the optimality conditions used by players. It is therefore built on the top of a first-order language L O used to define syntactically optimality conditions relevant for our analysis.
We report a molecular typing and epidemiologic analysis of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) cases diagnosed in our geographic area from 1990 to 2000. Our analysis suggests that transmission from patients with active PCP to susceptible persons caused only a few, if any, PCP cases in our setting.
neumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) is an important cause of illness and death in immunocompromised patients, specifically HIV-infected patients, transplant recipients, and patients with oncohematologic diseases. In the absence of a reliable method of in vitro culture of the pathogen, many aspects of PCP epidemiology remain to be elucidated (1) . Because of the evidence that contact with P. carinii occurs early in life, clinical infection in adults was thought to be mostly the result of reactivation of latent organisms. However, this concept has been challenged by evidence of the occurrence of de novo infection in HIV-infected persons (2, 3) . Possible sources include the environment, asymptomatic carriers, unrecognized infections, and patients with active PCP. Carriage by some persons with severe immunosuppression (4) or with chronic pulmonary disease (5) has been described recently. Direct transmission of P. carinii from patients with active PCP to susceptible persons is suggested by numerous reports of clusters of PCP cases, as well as by the demonstration of transmission of P. carinii in animal models (6) . However, recent molecular typing failed to support this hypothesis in some studies (7) (8) (9) . Indeed, different molecular P. carinii types were found in members of three different couples diagnosed with PCP (7), and the types were often different within clusters of PCP cases (8, 9) . Using molecular typing and epidemiologic analysis, we investigated the possibility of transmission of P. carinii between PCP patients who were seen in our region (about 500,000 inhabitants) during recent years. With few exceptions, all PCP patients are diagnosed at or referred to our hospital, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois.
From October 1990 to August 2000, 1,299 bronchoalveolar lavage specimens were examined at our hospital by using the Gomori staining method; 230 (18%) were positive for P. carinii (including eight recurrent episodes), among which 131 (57%) were available for typing (127 patients, four recurrent episodes). The typing system consisted of amplification by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of four variable regions of the P. carinii genome, followed by the detection of the polymorphisms using the single-strand conformation polymorphism technique (SSCP). The four genomic regions are: the internal transcribed spacer number 1 of the nuclear rRNA genes operon, the intron of the nuclear 26S rRNA gene, the variable region of the mitochondrial 26S rRNA gene, and the region surrounding the intron number 6 of the beta-tubulin gene. These four genomic regions were shown to be stable over prolonged periods of time by using SSCP (10). The interpretation of SSCP results for typing has been described (11, 12) . A P. carinii type is defined by a combination of four alleles corresponding to the four genomic regions. This system has been validated (10) (11) (12) . The SSCP typing system is easier and faster than DNA sequencing of multiple loci and allows the analysis of large collections of specimens. Moreover, this system detects a higher proportion of coinfections than typing by DNA sequencing of several genetic loci, probably because it is more sensitive at detecting alleles present in low amounts (11, 13) . This higher rate of detection is important for epidemiologic studies. The disadvantage of SSCP is that specimens containing more than two P. carinii types (about 30% of the specimens) cannot be typed because of the complexity of the alleles' configuration (11) .
The ages of the 127 patients ranged from 25 to 82 years (median 38), and 93 (73%) were men. Seventy-three percent (93/127) of the patients were HIV infected, and 27% (34) were immunosuppressed from other conditions. Twenty-three (18%) of the 131 PCP episodes corresponded to an infection with a single P. carinii type, 66 (50%) to a coinfection with two types, and 42 (32%) to a coinfection with more than two types. The four patients with two PCP episodes were infected with different types at each episode. Altogether, 35 different PCR-SSCP types were observed (numbered as in a previous publication [10] ).
To evaluate the proportion of PCP cases that could have resulted from transmission of P. carinii from a patient with active PCP to a susceptible person, we analyzed the distribution over time of the P. carinii types observed in the patients carrying one or two types (89 episodes, 39% of the cases in the period). Described clusters of PCPs (14) (15) (16) suggest that the incubation period of P. carinii infection may range from 3 to 12 weeks, which is also in accordance with experiments in animals (17, 18) . Accordingly, we hypothesized that the incubation period of a newly acquired infection would range from 3 weeks to 3 months and that a patient with PCP might be infectious from 1 month before diagnosis until the end of treatment To investigate whether these overlapping periods could reflect transmission of P. carinii between the members of the cluster, we calculated, for each type, the multinomial probability that the observed clusters occurred by chance alone using Monte-Carlo simulation experiments (we assumed uniform distribution over time). For types 1, 10, and 11, the probability was small (4.6%, 5.6%, and 5.4%, respectively). This probability is even smaller when we consider only 1990-1995 (before antiretroviral tritherapy was introduced), a period during which more cases were observed (1.5%, 2.3%, and 1.5%, respectively). This probability suggests that some clusters may indeed be the result of interhuman transmission of P. carinii (or of infection from a common source). However, 16 of the 19 clusters involved patients infected with different coinfecting types, implying that interhuman transmission was less likely (either the donor would have not transmitted both types or the receptor would have acquired one type elsewhere, or both).
We further investigated the possibility of transmission between members of each cluster using available epidemiologic data limited to the location of patients' residence and documented time in the hospital. None of the patients involved in the 19 clusters lived in the same city sector or the same town. To investigate the possibility of encounters in the hospital, timing and location of consultations and hospitalizations were determined by review of the patients' medical charts and the outpatient clinic's schedule. An encounter was considered compatible with an interhuman transmission of P. carinii if an "infectious" and a "susceptible" patient (as defined above) were present in the same ward or facility of the hospital on the same day. Analyses of all identified clusters did not reveal any hospital encounters. Because the period at risk of acquisition and transmission chosen might have been too restrictive, we also analyzed four clusters of patients with identical typing results but with PCP episodes occurring up to 10 months apart. Again, no encounter in the hospital, as defined above, was found.
Because the analyzed specimens represent only 39% (89/ 230) of the PCP episodes of the period, the possibility of a selection bias can be raised. Such bias cannot be firmly excluded but statistical analysis argues against it, at least for the period before antiretroviral tritherapy was introduced (a period covering 51% [87/171] of the specimens available). Statistical analysis showed that the distribution over time of the available specimens was not significantly different from that of the cases that were unavailable (Wilcoxon rank sum test; p=0.55), suggesting that the results for this period are representative of the overall situation. On the other hand, the two distributions for the period from 1996 to 2000 were different because the proportion of specimens stored for typing increased regularly during the period (p=0.07; 75% [44/59] of the specimens available).
Our study reports on a large number of PCP episodes observed for >10 years. Although our retrospective analysis does not allow us to exclude encounters of the clustered cases outside the hospital, the results strongly suggest that transmission of P. carinii by a patient with active PCP to a susceptible person contributed to only a very small number, if any, of the PCP cases in our geographic area during this period. The broad diversity of observed types suggests that the patients acquired P. carinii from multiple unknown sources not addressed in the present study. Moreover, hospital epidemiologic data and molecular typing did not provide evidence of transmission of P. carinii inside the hospital between members of clusters infected with the same P. carinii type. Thus, the main source of P. carinii is unlikely to be represented by patients with active PCP.
ADRENOCORTICAL carcinoma (ACC) is a rare malignancy associated with poor prognosis [1, 2] . Clinical and pathological feature as well as its approach to therapy is hampered by its low incidence (1-2/1,000,000/year) and heterogeneity [1, 2] . Tumors may be functional or nonfunctional depending on whether they produce biological active steroids, such as cortisol, aldosterone, androgens or estrogens. Disorganized expression of steroidogenic enzymes in individual carcinoma cells is considered to lead to ineffective corticosteroidogenesis, characteristic of altered steroid metabolism in ACC [3, 4] . We report herein a very rare case of estrogen-secreting ACC associated with subclinical Cushing's syndrome in whom detailed analysis by endocrinological, biochemical, immunohistochemical, and pathological studies was conducted.

Immunohistochemical analysis of steroidogenic enzymes, including cholesterol side chain cleavage (P-450 scc ), 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3b-HSD), 21-hydroxylase (P-450 C21 ), 11b-hydroxylase (P-450 11b ), 17a-hydroxylase (P-450 17a ), and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase (DHEA-ST) was performed on routinely processed formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded serial sections, using the biotin-streptavidin amplified method (Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan). Immunostaining procedure and characterization of primary antibodies used in the preset study have been described previously [5] [6] [7] .
Real-time RT-PCR for aromatase (P-450 aroma ) and insulin-growth factor (IGF)-II P-450 aroma and IGF-II mRNA levels were quantified by real-time quantitative RT-PCR using fluorescent SYBR Green technology (LightCycler; Roche Molecular Biochemicals, Mannheim, Germany), as described previously [8] . Total RNA extraction from the surgically resected tumor and first-strand cDNA synthesis was performed as described previously [9] . PCR primers were designed as following; forward primer 5'-GTGGACGTGTTGACCCTTCT-3' and reverse primer 5'-CACGATAGCACTTTCGTCCA-3' for human P-450 aroma , forward primer 5'-TGACCTCATTTCCCG ATACC-3' and reverse primer 5'-GGGGAGAATT CGTCTGATTG-3' for human IGF-II. The reaction produced 90 bp products for P-450 aroma and 110 bp products for IGF-II. Total RNAs extracted from tumor tissues from each one aldosterone-producing adenoma and cortisol-producing adenoma were also analyzed for P-450 aroma and IGF-II mRNA quantification as reference.
Urinary estrogen profile by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) Urinary estrogens (estrone, estradiol, estriol) concentrations of 24 h-urine collection were determined by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) method as previously reported [10, 11] . The reference values of urinary estrogens concentrations from 39 healthy men (age between 18 and 49 years old) were as follows: estrone (0-10 mg/g creatinine), estradiol (0-4 mg/g creatinine), and estriol (0-10 mg/g creatinine), respectively. lactin were elevated, cortisol, testosterone, LH and FSH levels were normal, but ACTH and hCG levels were undetectable. 24 hour-urinary excretion of cortisol, 17-KS, 17-OHCS, estrone, estradiol, estriol, pregnandiol and pregnantriol were all increased. Examination of hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis ( Fig. 1 ) revealed a lack of circadian rhythm of cortisol, non-suppressibility to low-and high-doses (1, 2, 8 mg) dexamethasone, unresponsiveness of ACTH and/or cortisol to CRH stimulation, and no response of cortisol to ACTH stimulation. These endocrine data are consistent with subclinical Cushing's syndrome.
Computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen revealed a huge (8.5 × 7.0 × 6.5 cm), heterogeneous right adrenal mass with possible central hemorrhagic necrosis (Fig. 2a-c) ; the mass displaced the liver and the kidney without an apparent evidence of infiltration or distant metastases.
[ 131 I]-Adosterol adrenal scintigraphy showed mild increase of radioisotope uptake by the right adrenal gland without a distinct uptake by the left adrenal gland (Fig.  2d) . These imaging data are compatible with ACC.
In February 2005, he underwent complete right adrenalectomy and partial resection of liver by a transperitoneal approach. Postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative plasma estradiol level and urinary excretion of estrogens (estrone, estradiol, estriol) decreased to undetectable ranges. Low-dose (1 mg) dexamethasone suppression test showed normal cortisol suppression, but low cortisol response to ACTH stimulation. Replacement therapy with hydrocortisone (20 mg) was substituted. After discharge, his gynecomastia and mild hyperprolactinemia gradually disappeared about 3 months after surgery, and replacement of hydrocortisone was stopped. He received adjunctive chemotherapy (etoposide plus cisplatin) without mitotane in combination with external radiation using Lineac.
The resected adrenal tumor weighing 330 g, was 9.0 × 8.5 × 6.0 cm in size; it was brown-yellow, wellencapsulated, and unlobulated, accompanied by a com- pressed atrophic non-neoplastic adrenal gland (Fig. 3) . Histologically, the tumor tissue consisted of disorderly solid growth pattern of compact cells with pleomorphic nuclei. Mitotic figures were easily identifiable (1-2/ HPF) (Fig. 3b, c) . Both Ki67 and p53 index were 13% and 11%, respectively (Fig. 4a, b) . The histological findings fulfilled at least seven of the Weiss's criteria for the histopathological diagnosis of ACC [11] : the presence of necrosis, diffuse architecture, high compact cells rate, high nuclear grade, high mitotic rate, sinusoidal invasion, and capsular invasion.
Immunohistochemical evaluation of steroidogenic enzymes revealed that immunoreactivities of all the steroidogenic enzymes (P-450 scc , P-450 C21 , 3b-HSD, P-450 17a , P-450 11b , DHEA-ST) examined were detected in the tumor cells to a varying degree (Fig. 5 ): diffuse and weak immunostaining for P-450 scc , P-450 C21 , and P-450 11b (Fig. 5a-c) ; focally and intensely staining for P-450 17a (Fig. 5d) ; diffuse and intense staining for DHEA-ST (Fig. 5e) ; intense and scattered staining for 3b-HSD (Fig. 5f ). These immunohistochemical features are consistent with the disorganized expression of steroidogenic enzymes in individual carcinoma cells, as described previously [3, 4] . Immunoreactivity of PRL was not detected in the tumor cells (data not shown).
Real-time quantitative RT-PCR for P-450 aroma and IGF-II revealed that the adrenal tumor tissue from the present case expressed far greater P-450 aroma mRNA (more than 600 times) and IGF-II mRNA (more than 400 times) than those of other hormone-producing tumors (aldosterone-producing adenoma and cortisolproducing adenoma) used as references (Fig. 6) . 
ACC is a very rare tumor accounting only for 0.05-0.2% of all malignancies, some of which are functional with regard to steroid hormone synthesis [1, 2] . Among 73 ACC cases previously reported from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Clinical Center, 60% were proven to be functional in whom 73% are associated with Cushing's syndrome and/or virilization, and only 2% with feminization [13] . Accordingly, Cushing's syndrome with or without virilization due to excessive androgens is relatively common in functional ACC, however, estrogen-secreting ACC with feminization is quite rare. Although the rate of subclinical Cushing's syndrome in ACC has not been well studied so far, the recent survey of 1004 cases of adrenal incidetaloma by the Italian Society of Endocrinology revealed 4 cases subclinical Cushing's syndrome out of 47 ACC cases (8.5%) [14] . The criteria of Weiss have been extensively used to differentiate between benign and malignant adrenal tumors [12] , and generally established as the only reliable method of discerning malignancy of the adrenocortical tumors. Immunohistochemical analyses of certain proliferation markers, such as p53 and Ki-67, have been demonstrated useful diagnostic markers for ACC: both proliferation indices are less than 10% in benign adrenal tumor, and correlates positively with malignant behavior in ACC [15, 16] . High index greater 10% for both Ki67 and p53 in the present tumor indicates malignancy with its highly proliferative character.
It has been shown that ACC is associated with IGF-II overexpression in the tumor tissue [17, 18] , and the recent microarray analysis have revealed that gene expression profile of IGF-II cluster in adrenal tumor tissue showed strong predictive value for the diagnosis of ACC [19] . From the present quantitative RT-PCR of IGF-II mRNA expression in the adrenal tumors, we found that steady-state IGF-II mRNA levels in the present adrenal tumor are far greater than those in two different functional (cortisol-and aldosteronesecreting) and benign adrenocortical tumors. These results strongly suggest that the expression of IGF-II mRNA by the tumor serves as a helpful diagnostic marker for ACC.
The present case with gynecomastia was shown to have increased serum and urinary excretion of estrogens and mild hyperprolactinemia. Plasma PRL levels became normalized as gynecomastia gradually disappeared postoperatively and the possible ectopic production of PRL by the tumor was excluded from the immunocytochemical study. Thus, his mild hyperprolactinemia seems likely due to nonspecific nipple stimulation of his tender gynecomastia.
Estrogens are synthesized by P-450 aroma through the conversion of androstenedione, testosterone, and 16a-hydroxyandorostenedione to estrone, estradiol, and estriol, respectively. This conversion occurs physiologically at ovary and adipose tissue, while normal adrenal cortex possesses very low levels of P-450 aroma activity [20] . We confirmed the extremely higher expression of P-450 aroma mRNA in the present tumor than that of benign functional adrenocortical tumors. Fur- thermore, the urinary analysis of estrogens excretion revealed that estrone is the major estrogens in the present case. Although possible conversion from adrenal androgens to estrogens may take place in peripheral tissue, it is most likely that androstenedione produced by the tumor is directly converted to estrone by the tumor-derived P-450 aroma . By contrast, increased circulating estradiol may be derived from the conversion of estrone via peripheral 17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 [21] , because plasma testosterone levels were within normal range. Autonomous cortisol production without clinically overt Cushing's syndrome, termed as subclinical Cushing's syndrome, accounts for 5-12% of adrenal incidentaloma [14, [22] [23] [24] . However, ACC associated with subclinical Cushing's syndrome has rarely been reported thus far [25, 26] . The diagnosis of subclinical Cushing's syndrome in the present case was made by the lack of Cushingoid feature and the following endocrine data; 1) suppression of plasma ACTH; 2) lack of circadian rhythm of cortisol; 3) no response of plasma ACTH and cortisol to CRH stimulation; 4) nonsuppressibility of cortisol to low-and high-dose (1, 2, 8 mg) dexamethasone, and 5) postoperative adrenal insufficiency necessiating cortisol replacement [25] .
Immunohistochemical study of steroidogenic enzymes demonstrated that the immunoreactivities of 3b-HSD was only detected in scattered tumor cells, while those of P-450 11b was diffusely but weakly detected in most tumor cells, suggesting the ineffective corticosteroidogenesis by the tumor. This may in part explain the autonomous, but relatively low cortisol production, possibly due to the altered expression of steroidogenic enzymes in individual tumor cells [3] . Alternatively, defective expression of cytoplasmic steroid transporter proteins, such as steroidogenic acute regulatory protein, and/or altered membrane receptors, such as lowdensity lipoprotein receptor and ACTH receptor, resulting from malignant transformation may partly account for the ineffective corticosteroidogenesis by the tumor. Estrogen-secreting ACC is very rare worldwide [1, 2] , and only four cases have been reported in Japan thus far [27] [28] [29] [30] . Thus, our case adds to the literature the fifth one. As summarized in Table 2 , they are 4 male and 1 female, with the age ranging from 18-month-old to 37-year-old; all 5 cases presented with gynecomastia, 3 with virilization and none with Cushing's syndrome.
In summary, we presented a rare case of estrogensecreting ACC with subclinical Cushing's syndrome. Data from endocrinological, pathological, immunohistochemical and biochemical studies in this case suggest the excessive secretion of estrogens derived from conversion of adrenal androgens by the overexpressed P450 aroma as well as the low efficiency of cortisol production possibly due to ineffective steroidogenesis by the tumor. 
A method for obtaining accurate, quantitative 57Fe Mossbauer spectra from biological samples is illustrated stepwise in a data reduction procedure. Exact criteria are presented for deciding when it is necessary to account for the effects of the Beer-Lambert law in the Mossbauer spectra from biological sampl~s. This procedure makes extensive use of the fast Fourier transform and other computer techniques in its data reduction and its curve-fitting stages. A method for optimizing sample thickness is presented. The choice of truncation in Fourier space as a means to numerically stabilize the deconvolution procedure is defended. Several advantages for curve fitting in Fourier space are shown. Maximization of information content is discussed for Mossbauer spectral simulation techniques.
For over 15 years, this laboratory has published Mossbauer spectra from iron-containing proteins and other biological samples using a unique method of data acquisition and reduction [1] [2] [3] [4] . During the course of these studies, this method has not been described in detail (except in theses) nor has the motivation for its use been presented. The following description is an attempt to correct these shortcomings.
The source lineshape convolution underlying Mossbauer spectra
In Fig. 1 , the fundamental parts of a Mossbauer spectrometer are illustrated in a cartoon. The radioactive source CS 7 Co in a rhodium matrix) decays via electron capture [5] to emit gamma rays (principally at 122 and 14 keY energies) and X-rays (at 20 keY and 6 keY energies). This emitted beam (fo) is collimated, passes tlp"ough the sample and is counted as single photons by an argon gas proportional counter. The energy of the source radiation is modulated via the relativistic Doppler shift [6] to yield a count rate that varies with source velocity, I(v). The entire process, including the nuclear resonance fluorescence (Mossbarier effect) and the non-resonant events, has been described by the following expression [2, 7] :
. exp [ -a(E) fact'.P/1000]dE (1) where I(v) and 10 are the detected 14 keY count rates (corrected for pileup and solid angle 'effects) in the presence and absence of a sample, respectively. J. and J. are the DebyeWaller factors for the source and absorber, S( v -E) is the source line shape, a(E) is the Mossbauer effect cross-section for the absorber, c is the absorber molarity, e is the sample thickness and .P is Avogadro's number. I. is the non-resonant 14 ke V background count rate and will be assumed here to arise entirely from 122 keY gamma rays and will be given the value measured by our argon counter within a month of the source manufacture date. Ib is the background rate due to the source but not attenuable by the sample. Ie is the cosmic background rate. The details of the measurements of these various functions and parameters is given elsewhere [4] . Typical values for a new source (35 mCi 57CO on 6 ~m Rh foil) are: 10 = 20500, I. = 750, Ib = 26 and Ie = 4 counts/so
It is common practice to present Mossbauer data as a plot of transmission (%), 100 l(v)lI ( -00) , as a function of source velocity. In 1971, Ure and Flinn [7] made a major contribution to this spectroscopic field by demonstrating a method to obtain the cross-section, a(v), from the data by a process of Fourier deconvolution, followed by taking the logarithm of the data as is usually the case in optical spectroscopy to account for the Beer-Lambert law. Their method was later modified [3] by a change to the apodization procedure and a detailed explanation of the laboratory and computer methods used to implement their Fourier deconvolution prQcedure. However, from a previous paper by Blume and Kistner [8] , one can show that Eqn (1) is erroneous for the cases where magnetic splittings (nuclear Zeeman, and magnetic hyperfine interactions [9] are part of the Hamiltonian for the absorbing 57Fe nucleus. These innovations were integrated into a data . reduction procedure by Filter et al. [3, 4] . The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate the advantages of this procedure over that in common practice for biological samples.
Because inelastic cross-sections for the relevant photon energies are proportional to Z2 (Segre, see [10] ), one can often model a biological sample as having the iron nuclei suspended in water when substituting values into Eqn (1). It is obviously important that high-Z elements, such as CI, be controlled for this model to be valid, but' for many samples with organic buffering agents the approximation is sufficient for our argument.
In the presence of magnetic splittings, circular polarization of the gamma-ray beam requires that Eqn (1) be revised to account for the density matrix for the impinging photons [8] . The effects of polarization are very complicated [4] , but the underlying principle can be simply demonstrated by answering the question: How much of 10 can be removed by an absorption process that requires a photon that is right circularly polarized? The answer is 'one-half' at a maximum because normally the source radiation is not circularly polarized; it is composed of half right-and half left-circularly polarized light. Because the absorption process requires right-circularly polarized light, it cannot affect photons with the 'wrong' polarization. As mentioned above, this effect requires that Eqn (1) be rewritten to account for circular polarization of 10 • In the following argument, we will assume that a(v) contains only a quadrupole pair describing each particular iron environment. Under this assumption, Eqn (1) is valid because there is no polarization in the absorption lines from a randomly oriented sample where its a(v) is the sum of quadrupole pairs [4] . In the laboratory, this assumption is equivalent to taking the spectrum at zero applied magnetic field and at a high temperature so that the high internal magnetic field of the iron atom is averaged to zero (for paramagnetic samples).
With this understanding, we can substitute numbers into Eqn (1) that model a protein sample as an iron atom dissolved in water. For an absorption displaying the smallest possible linewidth (calculated from the nuclear lifetime and decay branching ratios as full width at half maximum [FWHM] = 0.0975 mm/s), the absorption maximum is given by the expression for resonance fluorescence for one of the two-lines. Using mass attenuation coefficients for water that are available in the literature [11], we can rewrite Eqn (1) to model our spectrometer's count rate when running a biological sample at maximum resonance as:
. exp [-386c€ P JdE} + 750e-016 e +30. (4) p+p If x = 0.05, then e-X = 0.951. Thus, the approximation that e -x = 1 -xis certainly valid for the cases when the argument of the exponential is less than 0.05. In these situations the convolution performed by the integration can be approximated by a doubling of the linewidth. Accordingly, the depth of resonance is divided by a factor of two, leading to the approximation:
The number of counts represented by the resonance is [1(00)-
where t is the duration time (s) of the experiment. Because radioactive decay is described by Poisson statistics (see [12] ), the 'noise' in the experiment can be approximated as the square root of I(oo)t. Thus, a trivial definition of the signal/noise ratio (S/N) is:
Arbitrarily, we let c = 10-5 (10 j.lM) and t = 10 5 (28 h). We can then graph Eqn (6) as a function of e (Fig. 2) . This graph shows that sample thicknesses between 0.3-2 cm give reasonable signal/noise ratios with the maximum occurring around 0.9 cm. With the above assumptions, the graph is only rigorously valid for weak absorbers (c€< 1.3 X 10-4 ); however, if the absorber is strong, one is usually less concerned about optimizing signal/noise ratios. Thus, there is a large latitude allowed for choice of sample size. The optimization of signal/noise may not coincide with the point of view of the biochemist whose task it is to supply the sample. Our spectrometer has a cylindrical sample volume of 200 j.ll with a 0.69-cm diameter; therefore the sample thickness is 0.54 cm.
When is it necessary to account for the Beer-Lambert law?
From Eqn (4) one can see that the response of the spectrometer will become non-linear with respect to concentration when the argument of the exponential in the transmission integral [7] becomes too large. We showed that this error is approximately 0.001 if the exponential argument is 0.05. This kind of error is negligible unless the number of counts in the resonant peak of the data is greater than a million. (From Poisson statistics, we know that the noise is equal to the square root of the counts.) In most biological experiments, there are other unknowns (concentration and sample volume and geometry) that lessen the utility of such an accurate quantitation even if it were accessible. Furthermore, the difficulties in obtaining absolute quantitations are
All animals have to deal with multiple sensory cues that provide information of varying consistency and reliability about the external world. An increasingly popular explanation of how this is done is based on Bayesian reasoning: that the degree to which different information sources contribute to judgements should be weighted relative to their respective certainty. The view that human brains operate in this way has been substantiated by studies of optimal cue integration [1] , in which a perceptual judgement or action depends on at least two sensory inputs, both with some associated noise. Assuming normally distributed noise and a uniform prior distribution, the optimal estimate under Bayes rules is the same as the maximum-likelihood estimate and is obtained by averaging the inputs weighted by the inverse of their relative variance. Weighted averaging can be deduced from perceptual judgements that fall between conflicting cues, and optimality tested by systematically altering the variance of one of the cues, and looking for a corresponding alteration in the judgement. For example, in a classic study by Ernst & Banks [2] , the height of an object could be judged using independently manipulated haptic and visual depth cues. As increasing noise was introduced to the visual cue, the height judgement shifted gradually from a visual to a haptic bias, to a degree that was quantitatively predicted by the relative variance of the cues. Many subsequent psychophysical studies in humans have produced comparable results (reviewed in [3] ) and the possibility that other animals, even insects, may also perform optimal cue integration is discussed by Cheng et al. [4] .
Navigating ants have a 'toolkit' for foraging [5] . One element is path integration (PI), which by constant integration of heading direction (derived from the celestial compass) and distance walked (from a stride integrator and ventral optic flow) maintains a PI home vector pointing to the origin of the path [6] . A second element is visual memory of the surrounding scenery, which can be used independently of PI to determine an appropriate direction of travel (reviewed by Collett et al. [7] ). PI and visual memory can be set in conflict experimentally by displacing ants [8] [9] [10] [11] , rotating the sky polarization pattern [12, 13] or rotating the visual scene [14, 15] . Ants in these experiments tend to take a compromise direction between those indicated by their PI and visual memories. Collett [9] found the intermediate directions were systematically altered by the degree of discrepancy and argued that the weighting of the cues could & 2015 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved. approximate optimality, but did not attempt to directly manipulate the relative certainty of the cues. Legge et al. [11] found that ants took a compromise direction which was more biased towards the PI direction when the visual scenery at the release point was less familiar, and argued that this represents an optimal strategy of reduced weighting of a less certain cue. However, this experiment had only two levels of cue reliability, and no clear means of quantifying their relative degree of certainty.
In human cue integration studies, the certainty of different cues and the effects of manipulation (e.g. adding visual blur) are measured directly by a large number of repeated trials on individuals. This would be difficult for ants. Individuals make insufficient foraging trips in their lifetime, especially if estimates under several different conditions are needed; and recording the heading of ants under field conditions introduces additional noise that could swamp changes in variance due to the cue. However, for PI, the relative certainty of the PI home vector as distance walked increases can, under very general assumptions, be directly deduced [16] (see Material and methods). This provides an elegant method to manipulate the relative certainty of the PI cue: allow ants to run different distances before setting the directions indicated by the PI and visual memory in conflict. We find the heading direction they take closely matches the expected direction given by optimal integration of the cues. In a further experiment, we attempt to manipulate the directional uncertainty of the PI independently from the home vector length to establish what information about the uncertainty the ant actually uses to weight cues.
All experiments were conducted in June 2014, on a field site on the outskirts of Seville, Spain (37820 0 N, 5859 0 W), using the species Cataglyphis velox, a thermophilic ant. These ants are solitary foragers and learn idiosyncratic routes using terrestrial and celestial visual cues, rather than pheromones [17] . Two ant nests located approximately 100 m apart were chosen for experimentation. A route corridor approximately 1.5 m wide and 8 m long, enclosed by a small plastic barrier (approx. 4 cm high), was cleared around each nest, and cookie crumbs and meal worm pieces were provided ad libitum 7 m away from the nest. The corridors of the two nests pointed in different compass directions (nest 1: NW; nest 2: SW).
Ants were trained by allowing them to forage freely between the nest and feeder for at least 1 day. In experiment 1, individuals leaving the nest and running rapidly towards the feeder (i.e. ants familiar with the route) were captured in a small opaque tube at different locations along their outbound route: 0 m (i.e. just after their departure from the nest), 1 m, 3 m or 7 m (i.e. arriving at the feeder); capture locations were randomly interleaved. To trigger homing motivation, captured ants were provided with food before being released on a goniometer partitioned into 58 bins, either at a visually familiar location 1.5 m from the nest (1108 from the nest-to-feeder direction; see figure 1a and electronic supplementary material, figure S1, for views from nests and release points) or at a completely unfamiliar location (see electronic supplementary material, figure S3 ). Their heading direction was recorded by two observers as they crossed a circle of 60 cm radius around the release point.
In the second experiment, outbound ants were always captured 3 m away from the nest. Control ants were given a food item and immediately released on the goniometer at either the familiar or unfamiliar release points, as for experiment 1. For the experimental group, ants were confined for 5 min (without food) in a circular, opaque, fluon-lined pot (diameter: 10.5 cm; height: 8.5 cm) with a clear view of the sky but all terrestrial cues obscured. Video recording reveals the total distance walked within the pot was around 10 m. They thus should have accumulated additional noise in PI without increasing the length of the home vector. They were subsequently given a food item and released at either the familiar or unfamiliar release point.
To estimate the expected variance in the home vector for ants that have travelled different distances, their outbound path can be modelled as an allothetic directed walk [16] : at each time-step, the ant takes a step of equal length (L) in the same direction, from its nest towards the food. Noise can be considered equivalently as arising in the motor system (i.e. variance in the ant's actual location after a series of steps) or sensory system (i.e. variance in the ant's estimate of its location after a series of steps) or both. Because the ant has an external celestial compass, the angular error on each step is independent. Following [16] , if we denote the noisy step lengths as L 1 , L 2 . . ., and the noisy angles as D 1 , D 2 . . ., and take the X-axis as the direction of intended travel, then for the ant's position perpendicular to the direction of intended travel, Y, the expected variance after n steps is given by
where E denotes the expected value. Thus, variance increases proportionally to the number of steps taken, n, or equivalently for steps of equal length, the distance travelled (d T ) (figure 1b). The directional variance (i.e. the variance in the heading direction indicated by the home vector) is given by the angle
VðuÞ % V y d H ¼ 1 d 2 H VðyÞ / d T d 2 H :
For an ant moving in a relatively straight line (e.g. on a learned route from nest to feeder), d T % d H , and thus, perhaps surprisingly, V(u) will decrease with distance, proportionally to 1/d H . This analysis was confirmed using a particle filter simulation (electronic supplemental material, S4).
For experiment 2, if we assume the ant has travelled 13 m while the distance home remains 3 m, the directional variance should be
This means the variance would be equivalent to the variance of straight run of less than 1 m (
This estimate was also confirmed using the particle filter simulation.
To compare the model to our data, we assume the ant is using a weighted sum of the directions given by its view towards the nest and its PI system. According to maximum-likelihood estimation, the optimal weighting should be inversely proportional to the variance, or equivalently PI weight ¼ s The same optimal estimate can be derived from Bayes's theorem if we assume a uniform prior. Ants with no view or PI information appeared to head equally often in every direction (electronic rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R. Soc. B 282: 20151484 supplementary material, figure S1 ). Ants could have acquired a prior that coincides with the PI direction, due to repeated travel back from the food. However, in our experiment, this would not be distinguishable from a reduced relative weighting of the view, and hence would make no difference to the fit.
We compare the fit with optimal weighting based either on the positional variance (i.e. variance is proportional to distance) or the directional variance (i.e. direction is proportional to 1/distance); these fits have one free parameter, the variance of the view. We also look at the fit of a simple (non-optimal) linear weighting by distance: PI weight ¼ a Â distance, which also has one free parameter; or a linear weighting by distance with an upper threshold beyond which the weight is 1: PI weight ¼ 1, if distance . b, which has two free parameters. We compare the fit of these four models using the Akaike information criterion [18] .
By capturing ants on their route to a feeder and releasing them with food at a novel location, we set into conflict the directional information provided by the view (release-pointto-nest direction) with the direction indicated by their PI system (feeder-to-nest direction): a difference of 1108 in our experimental configuration (figure 1a). By capturing the outbound ants at different distances (0, 1, 3 and 7 m), the relative certainty of their PI should be altered, as described in the Material and methods section.
The procedure for the two nests was identical and no significant differences between them were observed, so they were grouped for analysis using circular statistics [19] . All groups showed oriented distributions (Rayleigh test p-values , 0.0008; z-values . 6.84), but the groups headed in significantly different directions from each other (Mann-Whitney U: p , 0.0001, x 2 ¼ 42:28). The further ants had travelled before capture, the closer the mean direction to the PI direction. On average, the 0 m group headed towards the nest (i.e. in accordance with the view), 1 and 3 m groups moved in intermediate directions, and the 7 m group followed the feeder-to-nest direction (PI) (figure 2a). The 1 and 3 m heading distributions show no signs of bimodality. Figure 2c shows the data described above with the heading direction relative to the nest chosen by each ant plotted against the distance travelled before capture. Both nests show the same pattern of results (compare grey and white dots), with increased weighting of the PI direction as distance increases. As described in the Material and methods section, we examined the fit of four different models to this data. The best fit (table 1) is given by assuming optimal weighting of the cues based on the directional variance of PI, which decreases proportionally with increasing distance. This fit has only one free parameter, the assumed (relative) variance of the view, and the best fit is obtained when this is set as equivalent to PI at 0.95 m.
The headings also show significant difference in scatter around the mean (O'Brien test: p ¼ 0.0178, F ¼ 3.52), with variability reduced as the PI vector length increases. Note that this inter-individual variability should not be taken to Experienced foragers were captured on their outward journey at either 0, 1, 3 or 7 m, provided with food, and released on a goniometer 1.5 m from the nest, and their direction of travel recorded 60 cm from the release point. In experiment 2, some 3 m ants were made to run for an additional 5 min in a pot before testing. (b) Ants will accumulate uncertainty during PI, so the positional variance of their estimate will increase (larger scatter of dots, yellow distributions) with distance. However, as the increase is proportional to distance, the angular error of the estimate (red angles and red distributions) will decrease inversely to distance (see Material and methods). For the pot condition in experiment 2, the additional accumulation of uncertainty should lead to a larger angular error for the same home vector length. The illustrated scatter was produced using a particle filter model (see the electronic supplementary material). (Online version in colour.) rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R. Soc. B 282: 20151484 reflect individual variability, but rather this change in scatter is also consistent with increased weighting of PI with increasing vector length, as previous results have shown larger inter-individual variability in use of learnt views than PI [20] , with the former affected by individual foraging history, whereas use of PI is not [21, 22] .
In our second experiment, we decoupled distance walked and PI vector length by capturing outbound ants 3 m from the nest and making them spend 5 min walking in a pot. Video analysis of nine ants showed they walked on average 10 m in the pot (min. 8 m, max. 15 m). Assuming ants are still performing PI during this time, we predicted their directional uncertainty should increase, to around the same variance as 1 m ants in experiment 1 (see Material and methods and figure 1b) and hence (assuming optimal weighting) they should make a similar directional choice. We used a higher n (¼ 40) to ensure experiment 2 should have power to detect the predicted difference. Figure 2c shows the heading directions of control (3 m) ants and 'pot' (3 m þ 10 m) ants. Both groups headed in the same intermediate direction (WWtest: p ¼ 0.8485; F ¼ 0.0367). This suggests the two cues are combined with a weighting that depends on the home vector distance, not the directional uncertainty; that is, it is highly consistent for all groups with a PI length of 3 m, irrespective of total distance covered (or time spent), and different to groups with a different PI length (experiment 1). It is possible that ants in the pot stopped integrating their paths, or that for some reason the expected accumulation of error in their PI estimate did not occur. Below we propose instead that ants do not maintain an internal estimate of their PI uncertainty, but weight cues optimally based on a proxy for uncertainty: the length of their PI.
A number of ant species have been shown to combine information from PI and their visual memory so as to head in intermediate directions when these cues are set in conflict [9] [10] [11] 13, 23 ]. Here, we tested whether this cue combination is optimal by varying the relative certainty of the PI cue.
Quantifying the variance associated with different cues, and with manipulation of those cues, usually requires estimation based on multiple trials for individuals [4] . It is crucial to note that although we use only single measurements on individual ants in this experiment, we can nevertheless obtain from first principles a quantitative expression for how the individual directional variance should change relative to distance travelled. This depends only on the well-justified assumption that ants are performing PI using an external compass reference [6] , which means variance perpendicular to the home direction increases proportionally to distance [24] ; from basic trigonometry, it follows that the variance of the angle subtended with the home position decreases inversely with distance. This allows us to determine, for a given certainty of a directional visual memory cue, how the relative weighting of the directional PI cue should change with distance, and hence predict the intermediate direction that ants should take when these are in conflict. It could be argued that the use of group data is not sufficient to demonstrate that individual ants are altering their weighting of the two cues (optimally or otherwise). However, the absence of bimodality in the distributions suggests we are not simply seeing the group average of single cue choices by individuals; individual ants took compromise directions. Although the precise weighting (and possible influence of other factors) varies across individuals, the population statistic can be estimated with the mean. All ants received similar training and were randomly assigned to one of the four groups, so the only factor that could explain the significant group differences in the mean heading direction is their differing PI state.
Previous work [11] suggests that ants can also modulate the weight attributed to their visual memory. At locations where the view is more familiar, the directional choice appears more strongly biased to the view. There may also be innate species differences, or environmental influences on the certainty of visual memory. Assuming optimal integration, we can predict how the relative weighting should vary with PI vector length for different levels of visual certainty (electronic supplementary material, figure S2 ). At strongly familiar locations, visual memories could be favoured even for large PI vector length, and this has been observed in ants [17, [25] [26] [27] . Conversely, PI should dominate behaviour at visually unfamiliar locations, consistent with present (electronic supplementary material, figure S3 ) and previous data [10, 11, 23, 28] . Although we only consider the initial bearing of ants in our experiment, note that movement towards home will alter the relative certainty of the cues, and thus a changing path direction (see for instance fig. 8 of [29] ) could still be consistent with optimal integration.
Cataglyphis velox ants show increasing bias towards the PI direction as home vector length increases (figure 2a,c) in a manner quantitatively predicted by optimal cue integration based on the decrease in PI directional uncertainty (figure 2c). We examined several alternative models of how the PI state might have affected directional choice (table 1) but none provide as close a fit to the data as the assumption that the cues are weighted inversely to the predicted directional variance of PI. We thus have equivalent evidence of optimal cue combination in ants such as has been provided in many psychophysical studies in humans [3] .
However, the results of our second experiment suggest that ants may not compute the actual directional certainty of their PI. Ants that should have accrued substantially more uncertainty (figure 1b, '3 m þ 10 m pot') gave equivalent weighting to the PI cue as ants with the same PI length ( figure 2b,d ), contrary to the prediction of optimal integration.
One potential explanation of this result is that ants did not update their PI during the extra walking time spent in the pot, and the observed behaviour is still optimal, as the PI directional uncertainty is unchanged. Indeed, ants may well be aware that they are trapped in a pot, although previous studies suggest that PI is continuously running when ants are constrained by narrow channels or forced into making a detour [30] . A second explanation is that ants do not explicitly maintain an estimate of PI certainty, but use PI home vector length as a proxy for certainty when weighting PI with other cues. The use of such a proxy would spare the need for their small brains to support the representation of, or calculation with, the actual uncertainty of PI. Supporting this view, we note that the 'uncertainty' revealed by nest search distributions in ants [31] , in a study where the outward path was unconstrained, also appears to be dependent on PI home vector length rather than absolute path length, even though the latter modifies the actual uncertainty of PI.
Nevertheless, the correct weight to associate with this proxy cue to obtain optimal integration is not trivial: as we have shown, the ant does not simply use a linear weighting (figure 2c). We think it is unlikely that individual ants in our experiment could have acquired the correct tuning of the weighting from individual experience, as their foraging experience consisted of a small number of trips within a cleared corridor, which would seem insufficient to collect meaningful measures of PI variance. We suggest that evolution has come up with an optimal weighting rule that reflects long-term average levels of certainty, encompassing the sensory-motor noise and typical meander of natural paths in a short-cut estimate. Different species might thus have evolved different tunings reflecting the reliability of their sensory-motor systems in their natural environments [32] . It remains possible that a pre-wired weighting rule could be further tuned by experience.
If optimal weighting in ants is due to use of a proxy rather than explicit measure of uncertainty, this raises the question of whether the same could be the case in at least some vertebrate and human examples of cue integration. Many studies assume that perceptual judgements that fit the predictions of optimal Table 1 . Comparing models of PI weighting, ordered by lower AIC ¼ nlog(error) þ 2K, where K is the number of free parameters for each model. A difference of more than 3 between the first and subsequent models suggests they have considerably less support. Performance of models to explain how directional dictate of PI is weighted. The smaller the AIC the better the fit. integration necessitate probabilistic processing. Ma [33] suggests that strong evidence for Bayesian processing dependent on explicit representation of uncertainty is provided by experiments in which unpredictable changes in the level of uncertainty on individual trials produces appropriate alterations in the weighting. However, if the estimate of uncertainty for a single trial can be based on some aspect of the cue that covaries with cue uncertainty in a consistent manner (a proxy or 'valid cue' [34] ) then it is possible that an appropriate mapping to the 'optimal' weighting could have been learnt or evolved. However, it is notable that both here and in previous studies [11, 23] , ants appear to combine cues even when they indicate very discrepant directions. That is, ants do not appear to be making a 'metaBayesian' computation to determine the likelihood that the cues come from a single source versus independent sources [16] . This may reflect a significant difference in the flexibility of cue integration in the invertebrate and vertebrate brain.
Substantial epidemiological evidence showed that an adverse intrauterine environment leads to permanent changes in physiology subsequently influencing the risk for adult diseases.
In human fetuses NOS3 expression directly correlated with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine levels as well as H3K9ac and H2A.Zac at the transcription start site. Using an in vitro model for placental dysfunction we confirmed the dynamic NOS3 response and histone acetylation patterns. Concomitantly we recognized massive turnover of Stat3 at a discrete binding site in the NOS3 promoter upon hypoxic conditions. Moreover, knock-down experiments targeting either STAT3 or NOS3 provided strong evidence for a functional NOS3 and STAT3 relationship. Interestingly, induced hyperacetylation and in vitro reporter assays showed that NOS3 expression becomes self-attenuated by co-expression of intronic 27-nt-ncRNA modulating STAT3 signaling.
We demonstrate that adaptive NOS3 regulation in response to placental dysfunction involves differential epigenomic signatures and that a rapid NOS3 self-limiting response to an ectopic trigger co-exists with longertermed epigenetic changes. Persistence of such marks might contribute to impaired vascular endothelial response and increased risk for diseases later in life of children who suffered from placental insufficiency.
Flaviviruses, which belong to the Flavivirus genus, and Flaviviridae family, are globally significant arthropod-borne viruses that cause disease in hundreds of millions of people annually across half of the world; flaviviruses include Dengue virus (DENV, serotypes 1-4), Zika virus (ZIKV), West Nile virus (WNV), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), yellow fever virus (YFV), and tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) [1] .
Flaviviruses are enveloped viruses with a single-stranded RNA genome, composed of one large open reading frame (ORF), flanked at both its 5 and 3 ends by short noncoding sequences termed untranslated regions (UTRs); the flavivirus genome also contains a type I cap structure (m 7 GpppAmp) at its 5 end, and characteristically lacks a poly(A) tail at its 3 end. The virus enters the host cell by 

The architecture of the RdRp is well conserved across flaviviruses, as confirmed by the recently determined crystal structures of the RdRp from WNV, DENV, JEV, and ZIKV. Similar to the architecture of the RdRp domains from other RNA viruses, the flavivirus RdRp domain architecture resembles an encircle right hand with three channels (the template entry, dsRNA, and the NTP entry channels), and can be divided into palm, fingers, and thumb subdomains surrounding the active site. A priming loop identified in the thumb subdomain is thought to play a major role in both ensuring correct de novo initiation and providing an initiation platform that stabilizes the de novo initiation complex [2, [24] [25] [26] .
Seven structural motifs (A to G) responsible for NTP binding and catalysis are shared by all viral RdRps with highly homologous sequences and/or viral RdRps that exhibit structural conservation (Figure 2A) . Motifs A and C contain two conserved aspartic acid residues (Asp 533 and Asp 665) involved in the coordination of divalent metal ions for nucleotide polymerization. Motif B helps movement of the template strand in the late stages of transcription [27] . Motif D is related to nucleotide discrimination, and the conserved residue K359 plays an important role in RdRp structural rearrangements required to form the RNA-NTP-UTP complex [28] . Motifs E and C interact with the backbone of the RNA product [29] . Motif F, which consists of the F1, F2, and F3 submotifs, with an F4 submotif observed in the TBEV RdRp [30] , is proposed to bind stem loop A prior to viral RNA replication and help stabilize the nascent base pair. The E460D substitution in TBEV motif F was shown to confer resistance to galidesivir, a broad-spectrum RNA virus inhibitor, in cell culture with a 100% survival rate, and no clinical signs were observed in infected mice [31] . Motif G is proposed to regulate access of the ssRNA substrate to the template channel and/or RdRp 

The architecture of the RdRp is well conserved across flaviviruses, as confirmed by the recently determined crystal structures of the RdRp from WNV, DENV, JEV, and ZIKV. Similar to the architecture of the RdRp domains from other RNA viruses, the flavivirus RdRp domain architecture resembles an encircle right hand with three channels (the template entry, dsRNA, and the NTP entry channels), and can be divided into palm, fingers, and thumb subdomains surrounding the active site. A priming loop identified in the thumb subdomain is thought to play a major role in both ensuring correct de novo initiation and providing an initiation platform that stabilizes the de novo initiation complex [2, [24] [25] [26] .
Seven structural motifs (A to G) responsible for NTP binding and catalysis are shared by all viral RdRps with highly homologous sequences and/or viral RdRps that exhibit structural conservation ( Figure 2A ). Motifs A and C contain two conserved aspartic acid residues (Asp 533 and Asp 665) involved in the coordination of divalent metal ions for nucleotide polymerization. Motif B helps movement of the template strand in the late stages of transcription [27] . Motif D is related to nucleotide discrimination, and the conserved residue K359 plays an important role in RdRp structural rearrangements required to form the RNA-NTP-UTP complex [28] . Motifs E and C interact with the backbone of the RNA product [29] . Motif F, which consists of the F1, F2, and F3 submotifs, with an F4 submotif observed in the TBEV RdRp [30] , is proposed to bind stem loop A prior to viral RNA replication and help stabilize the nascent base pair. The E460D substitution in TBEV motif F was shown to confer resistance to galidesivir, a broad-spectrum RNA virus inhibitor, in cell culture with a 100% survival rate, and no clinical signs were observed in infected mice [31] . Motif G is proposed to regulate access of the ssRNA substrate to the template channel and/or RdRp translocation [32] . In addition, two conserved cavities in the thumb subdomain, cavity A and cavity B, are found in the RdRp domain of DENV.
Functional mutagenesis of these two cavities showed that cavity B, but not cavity A, is essential for RNA synthesis. The alanine mutation of L328, W859, and I863 in cavity B decreased the initiation of RNA synthesis potentially by affecting formation of the RNA template-RdRp-NTP complex. Furthermore, the K330A mutation abolished viral replication by reducing the NS3/NS5 interaction [33] .
The RNA template entry tunnel and "N" pocket located at the junction of the thumb and palm subdomains are two conserved inhibitor-binding sites in the RdRp domains of both DENV and ZIKV, and a series of inhibitors have been identified [34, 35] . NITD107 is targeted to the RNA tunnel and may prevent viral RNA synthesis via competition with the RNA substrate after binding [25] . Based on fragment screening, JF-31-MG46, compounds 27 and 29, and compound 8 of 2,1-benzothiazine 2,2-dioxides were identified to bind in the "N pocket". These compounds were proposed to hinder RdRp conformational changes during its transition from initiation to elongation, and thus inhibit RdRp activity [36] [37] [38] .
Interestingly, flavivirus replication occurs within the cytoplasm of infected cells; however, NS5 can translocate from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. In DENV-2, DENV-3, ZIKV, and YFV, a significant amount of NS5 accumulates within the nucleus, while NS5 in DENV-1, DENV-4, JEV, and WNV is predominantly localized within the cytoplasm of infected cells [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] . Nevertheless, WNV KUN NS5 has been demonstrated to localize within the nucleus only in the presence of a specific nuclear export inhibitor [42] . Bipartite nuclear localization signals (NLSs) distributed between the fingers and thumb subdomains comprise an aNLS (residues 369-405), which is recognized by the conventional NLS-binding importin α/β heterodimeric nuclear import receptor, and a bNLS (residues 320-368), which is recognized by importin β1, can target β-galactosidase to the nucleus ( Figure 2B ), and acts as the binding site for the flaviviral helicase [44, 45] . However, in ZIKV, the NS5 NLS is located in the aNLS region and interacts with only importin α [46] .
Site mutagenesis of NLS showed that the aNLS, rather than the bNLS, is essential for NS5 nuclear accumulation and viral replication, particularly as the mutation of 387 KKK 389 in DENV-2 NS5 abolished NS5 nuclear import and viral production, which suggested the integral role of nuclear NS5 during flavivirus infection [47] . In ZIKV, the 390 KRPR 393 in the monopartite NLS is necessary to direct NS5 to the nucleus, and its mutation to 390 ARPA 393 changed NS5 localization from the nucleus to the cytoplasm [46] . In addition, the C-terminal 18 amino acids of NS5 regulate the translocation of NS5 between the cytoplasm and nucleus. The P884T mutation resulted in the mislocalization of NS5 to the cytoplasm without compromising viral fitness, and the R888K mutation led to a severely attenuated phenotype, even though NS5 was located in the nucleus [48] . Although a large proportion of NS5 accumulates in the nuclei of infected cells, the role of NS5 in the nucleus has not yet been elucidated. Recent studies have suggested that nuclear NS5 modulates host cell immune responses and virus production [46, 47, 49] and affects the splicing of antiviral response mRNAs [50] . In infected cells, NS5 is able to bind and degrade the IFN-regulated human transcriptional activator STAT2 to suppress type I interferon signaling in ZIKV [51] . STAT1 is found to colocalized with ZIKV NS5, and overexpressed NS5 is able to upregulate STAT1 related genes, however, this regulation is dampened in response to expression of mislocated NS5 mutant [46] .While in DENV, only proteolytically processed NS5 can efficiently mediate STAT2 degradation, particularly when the cellular protein UBR4 binds to NS5, while the unprocessed and processed forms of NS5 can bind NS5 [52, 53] . Furthermore, nuclear NS5 is also thought to dampen the IL-8 induction response, resulting in increased virus production [49] . Proteomic and transcriptome analyses of DENV-infected cells showed that nuclear NS5 interacts with the spliceosome U5 snRNP proteins and hijacks the splicing machinery, thus forming an environment less restrictive for viral replication [50] . Analysis of the crystal structure of DENV NS5 showed that these two NLSs are present in the RdRp domain, raising the possibility that the NLS regulates RdRp activity via the rearrangement of NS5 [54] .
Conventionally, NS5 translocation is thought to occur through the activities of intracellular nuclear transport proteins and members of the host importin (IMP) superfamily [55] . Knowledge of the interaction between NS5 and IMP has enabled the identification of flavivirus NS5 nuclear import inhibitors with novel screening approaches, and many specific small-molecule inhibitors, some of which have apparent antiviral activities, have been analyzed. Ivermectin has been shown to inhibit importin α/β1, leading to a significant decrease in DENV production [56] . N-(4-Hydroxyphenyl) retinamide (4-HRP), which can block the recognition of DENV NS5 by the host nuclear import proteins IMP-α/β1 and thus reduces viral RNA levels and titers, is equally effective in protecting against DENV-1-4-and ADE-mediated infection [57, 58] . GW5074 targets the host nuclear transport protein IMPα and prevents IMPα heterodimerization with IMPβ1, thereby blocking the ability of IMPα to transport NS5 to the nucleus. Meanwhile, GW5074 at low concentrations has shown strong antiviral activity against DENV-2, ZIKV, and WNV [59] . Conventionally, NS5 translocation is thought to occur through the activities of intracellular nuclear transport proteins and members of the host importin (IMP) superfamily [55] . Knowledge of the interaction between NS5 and IMP has enabled the identification of flavivirus NS5 nuclear import inhibitors with novel screening approaches, and many specific small-molecule inhibitors, some of which have apparent antiviral activities, have been analyzed. Ivermectin has been shown to inhibit importin α/β1, leading to a significant decrease in DENV production [56] . N-(4-Hydroxyphenyl) retinamide (4-HRP), which can block the recognition of DENV NS5 by the host nuclear import proteins IMP-α/β1 and thus reduces viral RNA levels and titers, is equally effective in protecting against DENV-1-4-and ADE-mediated infection [57, 58] . GW5074 targets the host nuclear transport protein IMPα and prevents IMPα heterodimerization with IMPβ1, thereby blocking the ability of IMPα to transport NS5 to the nucleus. Meanwhile, GW5074 at low concentrations has shown strong antiviral activity against DENV-2, ZIKV, and WNV [59] . 


The 5 -and 3 -terminal regions of the flavivirus genome consist of multiple RNA sequence elements and tertiary structures that function as cis-acting elements and regulate replication and translation of the viral genome. In particular, the 5 UTR comprises two stem loops called stem loop A (SLA) and stem loop B (SLB), and SLA has been shown to function as a promoter for RNA synthesis during the replication process [60, 61] . The 3 UTR is divided into three regions according to sequence variability (domains I, II, and III), and the 3 SL of domain III is a major determinant of viral RNA replication competence [62] . In addition, complementary sequences present at both ends of the genome are essential for flaviviral RNA synthesis, and at least three pairs of RNA cyclization sequences mediate long-range RNA-RNA interactions. These sequences include the 5 -3 cyclization sequences (5 -3 CSs), 5 -3 sequence upstream of the AUG region (5 -3 UAR), and a 5 -3 sequence downstream of the AUG region (5 -3 DAR) [63] [64] [65] .
EMSA and footprinting assays documented the interaction between NS5 and the first hairpin element in the 5 UTR, designated stem loop A (SLA). In this model, specific structures of the SLA, a top loop and a side stem loop, were found to be necessary for genome replication in infected cells and polymerase activity in vitro. Mutations of nucleotides at the top of SLA and in the side stem loop of the SLA element impaired promoter-dependent RNA synthesis, and revertant viruses restored viral replication when specific mutations were introduced at the top loop of SLA [60] . Deletion of SLA within the 5 UTR (DENV) eliminated protein binding. However, deletion of SLB, the 5 CS, or both regions did not affect RNA production [61] . The NS5-SLA interaction is affected by MgCl 2 and NaCl concentrations in solution, and NS5 is able to bind SLAs from different DENV serotypes, which indicated that NS5 recognizes the overall shape of SLA, as well as specific nucleotides, to form an SLA-polymerase complex [66] . Recently, a 5 -UAR-flanking stem (UFS) element within SLB was demonstrated to play an important role in efficiently recruiting the polymerase to the 5 end of the flavivirus RNA, and a switch-like structure formed by genome cyclization has been shown to regulate dynamic RdRp binding for RNA synthesis [67] . Recently, it was proposed that RNA binding showed no preference between NS5 and RdRp, since both of these proteins bound RNA through the same interacting sequence. Furthermore, the MTase exhibited negligible RNA specificity [68] . Studies on the interaction between the DENV RdRp with the viral genome suggested that the RdRp thumb domain recognizes an ACAG motif. Intriguingly, both the 5 SLA and 3 SL contain the ACAG motif. Site-directed R770A, R771A, R8561, and K841A mutations of RdRp abolished its interactions with both the 3 SL and 5 SLA, suggesting that there is likely a specific RNA-binding site in RdRp. Therefore, a proposed Arg-rich site in the thumb domain of the RdRp could be the RdRp-SLA interaction site [66, 68] .
Generally, the 3 UTR is structurally subdivided into three autonomously folded regions (domains I-III) that show sequence and structural conservation across members of the genus to various extents; furthermore, the extreme 3 region is a small hairpin 3 stem loop (sHP-3 SL) [69] [70] [71] . Domain I is located downstream of the translation stop codon. In most flaviviruses, domain I appears as a hypervariable sequence followed by two conserved stem loop domains (SL-I and SL-II). While domain II is moderately conserved, domain II in WNV contains only one characteristic dumbbell (DB) structure, while that in DENV-2 contains duplicate DB structures (DBI and DBII). Domain III is defined by two highly conserved terminal genomic functional elements: a short hairpin (sHP) and 3 SL. The top loop of the 3 SL (3 SL-TL) contains a conserved pentanucleotide sequence, 5 -CACAG-3 , with occasional substitutions at the 4th nucleotide. Mutagenesis showed that base pairing and the sequence at the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 5th positions, but not the 4th position, of the pentanucleotide are critical for RNA synthesis [72] . The ACAG motif in the 3 SL-TL serves as a cis-element for (-) strand viral RNA synthesis in cells. Deletion of the 3 SL-TL dramatically impaired RdRp complex formation and completely abolished viral RNA replication in BHK-21 cells.
Critical residues in the thumb domain that participate in 3 SL-RdRp interactions were defined by RNA-protein interaction assays. R773, R770, Y838, and K841 likely create a TL RNA-accommodating platform, while Y838 seems to play a key role in side chain stacking during RNA recognition [68] . A previous study showed that RdRp has a narrow template channel that accommodates the 3 end of an RNA in only a single-stranded form. Thus, the tertiary structure of the 3 UTR would impair polymerase activity and repress RNA synthesis; thus, structural changes around the 3 terminal nucleotides seem to be a prerequisite for polymerase initiation [60] . However, the recently attained structure of HCV RdRp in complex with a double-stranded RNA model revealed that removal of a β-hairpin loop that impedes access of the template RNA to the thumb domain in NS5B increased de novo RNA synthesis by >100-fold, promoted RNA binding, and induced significant conformational changes producing an open form, allowing primer-template RNA duplex access to the catalytic core [73] . Taken together, these findings indicate that cooperation between the 3 SL and RdRp is required for RNA synthesis. 5 -3 -Hybridization not only brings the 3 end of the RNA near the 5 promoter, but also plays a role in making the 3 -terminal nucleotides of the viral genome available for the viral RdRp during the initiation of RNA synthesis. Furthermore, the interaction between 3 SL and RdRp facilitates rearrangement of the thumb domain, which provides the template access the active site to initiate de novo RNA synthesis.
An in vitro RNA synthesis assay showed that recombinant full-length NS5 and its truncated RdRp domain alone are capable of initiating both de novo and primer-dependent (3 -end elongation) replication using various RNA templates in vitro [74] [75] [76] [77] . The 3 83 nucleotides of JEV were demonstrated to be the minimal RNA template required for RNA synthesis initiation [21] . In vitro DENV RNA synthesis experiments showed that RdRp synthesis requires exogenous viral RNA template containing the 5 -and 3 UTRs; these UTRs contain conserved elements including the highly conserved 5 -CYC motif, which is complementary to the 3 -CYC motif within the 3 UTR and the 3 -stem loop region [19] . However, although the template can contain plus-or minus-strand 3 -untranslated regions of the genome, a greater amount of +RNA synthesis is observed with the latter RNA template [21] .
NS3 and NS5 are the two major enzymatic components required for viral RNA unwinding and subsequent RNA synthesis, respectively. How these two enzymes cooperate during viral replication is not known. NS3 contains an N-terminal serine protease domain and a C-terminal ATP/helicase domain [78] . The NS3 helicase domain is further divided into three subdomains. Subdomains I and 2 are associated with ATP binding and/or hydrolysis and interdomain communication and RNA binding, respectively. Subdomain 3 has been suggested to interact with the RdRp [79, 80] .
The interaction between the flaviviral NS3 and NS5 proteins has been demonstrated by immunoprecipitation assays with cultured cells and yeast two-hybrid studies, and the following interacting regions have been mapped: the C-terminal region of NS3 (residues 303-618) and the N-terminal region of RdRp domain (residues 320-368) [44] . A previous study showed that NS5 stimulates NS3 NTPase and RTPase activities. In an NTPase activity assay, NTPase activity was stimulated by NS5 in a dose-dependent manner. Meanwhile, the RTPase activity of NS3 was shown to be increased in the presence of NS5 [81] . A recent study in ZIKV NS5 showed that its helicase activity is specifically facilitated by the opening of dsRNA with a 3 overhang through an increase in the dsRNA unwinding velocity, and the mutation of two conserved residues in NS3 that might disrupt the NS3-NS5 interaction, N569A and E573A, leads to significant deficiencies in viral replication [82] . Residues N570 in NS3 and K330 in NS5 are key residues involved in the interaction between NS3 and NS5. The mutation of K330 in NS5 disrupted the NS3-NS5 interaction and completely abolished viral replication, while the N570A NS3 mutation induced the synthesis of low but unsustainable amounts of viral RNA with transfected RNA used as a template [33, 80] .
Although the NS3-RdRp interaction has been demonstrated in several flaviviruses, the exact function of cooperation between these two enzymatic proteins is unknown. NS5 or the RdRp may facilitate the localization of NS3 close to the entrance of the RNA template tunnel, so that these two catalytic components are in close spatial proximity to enable efficient RNA synthesis.
NS5, the largest and most conserved flavivirus protein, consists of both an MTase involved in capping and the central replication enzyme, the RdRp, naturally fused through a 10-residue flexible linker. A longstanding question, however, has been whether these two domains cooperate to regulate viral replication and cap formation. Intramolecular interactions between the MTase and RdRp were first identified through analysis of the full-length NS5 structure by in silico docking of the WNV MTase domain onto the RdRp domain [2] . The MTase has been proposed to interact with the finger subdomain of the RdRp, primarily through a hydrophobic network that involves P113, L115, and W121 from the MTase and Y350, F466, and P584 from the RdRp. Notably, none of these six residues participate in catalysis, but five out of the six residues are highly conserved across flaviviruses, with the exception of L115, which is moderately conserved [32, 83, 84] .
According to overall crystal structure analysis of flavivirus NS5, the MTase domain is stabilized by motif F in the RdRp domain, primarily by the conserved residue F466, which stacks against a pocket on the surface of the MTase domain formed by L115, L126, and P113. The interaction between F446 and P113 is the key feature of the MTase-RdRp interface among flavivirus NS5 [29] . Among YFV, ZIKV, and JEV NS5, the residues present at the interface of the MTase and RdRp domains are highly conserved and adopt similar conformations. By comparison, in DENV, the MTase-RdRp interaction utilizes a different interface due to disorder in motif F in the NS5 structure [29, 84] . Mediated by the linker, the MTase domain is attached to the backside of the RdRp domain through hydrophobic interactions, which shields the top-right rim of the NTP entry channel. The close proximity of the MTase and RdRp suggests that the orientation of the MTase regulates the newly synthesized viral RNA exiting from the template-binding channel of the RdRp domain [32] .
It was recently proposed that two molecules of NS5 inside the asymmetric unit form a dimer in which the MTase domains are oriented away from each other. In the NS5 monomer, the dsRNA exit site of the RdRp and the active site of the MTase face opposite directions in both the DENV and JEV NS5 structures. In contrast, in the NS5 dimer, the MTase and RdRp domains face the same direction [85] . Six independent ZIKV NS5 molecules in the crystallographic asymmetric unit were found to be organized into three quasi-equivalent dimers. Each monomer contributes to the dimer interface, which is composed of two types of intermolecular contacts between MTase-MTase and MTase-RdRp. MTase-RdRp contacts at the dimer interface include residues E155, V156, A159 from the MTase of the first monomer and the following residues from two subdomains of the neighboring NS5 RdRp domain: i) L321, I322, V325 (β11) and G324 and V325 (α10) within the fingers subdomain and ii) G747, I750 (β22-α28 loop) and M871 and R874 and I875 (α33) at the back of the thumb subdomain. In this arrangement, the active site cavities of the MTase domains of two interacting molecules are directly connected, and the two RdRp exit channels remain accessible to the solvent [86] .
The impact of the MTase domain on RdRp activity was tested by comparing the RdRp activities of recombinant NS5 and RdRp proteins. Deletion of the ZIKV NS5 MTase domain decreased de novo-initiated RNA products to approximately half the level observed with full-length NS5, especially the products of RNA elongation [83] . Full-length DENV2 NS5 exhibited superior de novo initiation and elongation activities compared to the RdRp domain alone [87] . Substitution of the DENV2 NS5 RdRp with the corresponding region from DENV4 severely attenuated replication in infected cells, as did reverse mutations at K761 and D51 in the DENV2 MTase domain [88] . When mutations to polar or charged residues were introduced into these sites, viral replication levels were significantly affected [89] . The disruption of dimer formation and the MTase-RdRp interface by the R681A mutation of the RdRp drastically affected in vitro RdRp elongation activity [90] . These results indicated that the interaction between the MTase and RdRp is important for polymerase activity, since full-length NS5 has higher polymerase activity than the RdRp alone for efficient viral replication.
MTase-RdRp interactions potentially promote the adoption of different NS5 arrangements to facilitate positioning of the MTase near the site of the recently synthesized dsRNA exit and enable 5 -RNA cap transfer. However, adopting this conformation might be limited in the replication complex due to the multiple protein-protein interactions on the membrane. In the dimeric NS5 structure, the distance from the dsRNA exit of the RdRp of one monomer to the MTase active site of the other monomer is closer than the distance of the RdRp of one monomer to its own MTase; thus, the dsRNA product could more easily access the MTase active site of the neighboring RdRp.
There are still gaps in our understanding of how the RdRp interacts with viral proteins and genomic RNA to efficiently coordinate their respective functions during RNA synthesis and capping. To date, there are no antiviral therapies available, and limited vaccines for flaviviruses. As the most conserved protein among flaviviruses, the RdRp plays a vital role in viral replication, which allows researchers to utilize this promising target for the development of antiviral inhibitors and therapeutics. In this review, we have attempted to comprehensively cover viral genome biogenesis mediated by the RdRp protein. The RdRp motifs, which are conserved among flaviviruses, participate in catalyzing de novo initiation, NTP binding and new RNA synthesis. In some sections, we emphasized the subcellular localization of NS5 and small-molecule inhibitors developed to target this region. Interestingly, the subcellular localization of NS5 from different flaviviruses varies. To some extent, the NLS within the RdRp domain leads to different subcellular NS5 distributions; however, this sequence is not well conserved, and further understanding of the mechanism of this difference and the distinct functions of nuclear NS5 is required. In addition, during the viral life cycle, RdRp regulates RNA replication via protein-RNA and protein-protein interactions to facilitate the efficient replication of genomic RNA. For example, the RdRp recognizes the initiation site of the genome via an RdRp-UTR interaction, the interaction between RdRp and NS3 promotes NTPase and helicase activity, and the interaction between the RdRp and the MTase is involved in new RNA synthesis. The RdRp is indispensable for flavivirus replication because of not only its own polymerase activity, but also its interactions with other viral proteins and RNAs, which leads to efficient genomic RNA replication. However, understanding how these components cooperate and determining whether they interact in a distinct order or ratio requires further study.

non-GCB by IHC, were categorized as ABC by GEP. There were significant survival differences (overall survival and progression-free survival) if cases were classified by GEP, whereas if cases were categorized by IHC only progression-free survival differed significantly. Importantly, patients assigned as non-GCB/ABC both by IHC and GEP had the worst prognosis, which was also significant in multivariate analyses. Double expression of MYC and BCL2 was more common in ABC cases and was associated with a dismal outcome. In conclusion, to determine COO both by IHC and GEP is the strongest outcome predictor to identify DLBCL patients with the worst outcome.
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of aggressive lymphoma and is a heterogeneous disease with different histopathologic, phenotypic and genetic features with varying clinical outcomes. 1, 2 Based on gene expression profiling (GEP), the tumor cells are considered to be derived from activated B-cells (ABC) or germinal center B-cells (GCB). 3, 4 Several studies have shown a survival benefit for DLBCL patients with a GCB phenotype compared to an ABC phenotype, 5, 6 whereas other have not. [7] [8] [9] In addition, a third group with unclassified cases (UC) was reported, and proposed to have an inferior outcome similar to ABC-DLBCL. 4, 10 In the updated World Health Organization (WHO) classification of Tumors of Hematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, 2 information on the cell-of-origin (COO), either by immunohistochemical (IHC) stainings 6, [11] [12] [13] or by GEP, is required for a definite DLBCL diagnosis.
In clinical practice, however, the use of GEP has not been widely adopted. Most GEP technologies require fresh-frozen tumor tissue.
But in the daily, clinical diagnostic work-up, formalin fixed, paraffinembedded (FFPE) tissue is the primary source, and fresh-frozen material is not routinely collected. Therefore, IHC algorithms have been developed as substitutes and applied with varying concordance to GEP. The most commonly used classification is the Hans algorithm 11 based on the IHC staining results of three proteins: CD10, BCL6 and MUM1, although other systems have also been proposed. 6, 12, 13 However, these IHC algorithms will only identify two groups; GCB or non-GCB, since they cannot identify cases classified as UC by GEP.
In recent years, the NanoString technology Lymph2Cx assay was developed based on GEP, which shows a strong concordance to the original COO model and can be applied on FFPE tissue. 10, [14] [15] [16] This assay uses a limited set of 15 pre-specified genes and five housekeeping genes, and has the potential to identify all three subgroups of DLBCL. 17, 18 In this study, our aim was to investigate the concordance between the Lymph2Cx assay and the IHC algorithm by Hans et al. 11 in relation to clinical characteristics, tumor markers and survival outcome. This was to identify which model would be the best survival predictor in a large cohort of Swedish and Danish DLBCL patients (n = 359).

Three hundred and fifty-nine patients were included in the study and Patients with a known previous history of a low-grade lymphoma were excluded. Clinical information was collected from patient records.
Patients were followed-up with clinical examinations and radiologic examinations were used when relapse or progressive disease was suspected. Age-adjusted International Prognostic Index (aaIPI) was used (one point for each: (a) Ann Arbor stage III-IV; (b) elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH); (c) and ECOG performance status 2-3). Here 0-1 is considered to be low risk and 2-3 is considered to be high risk, in accordance with national guidelines in Sweden and Denmark.
Extraction of RNA from FFPE tissue was done according to the AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit for FFPE protocol (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). That protocol allows for the simultaneous purification of genomic DNA and total RNA from the same biological sample. Purification of RNA was done with the AllPrep column flow-through, using an RNeasy Mini spin column.
Samples were analyzed with the Lymph2CX assay on a NanoString instrument according to the manufacture's instructions. The dataset was analyzed using the research use only (RUO) version of the NanoString Lymphoma Subtyping Test (LST), which is based on the Lymph2Cx assay, to determine the COO molecular subtype of each sample. 19 The LST algorithm measures the geometric mean of five housekeeping genes (HK geomean), to ensure RNA quality based on a pre-defined clinical QC threshold of 128. An HK geomean value below 64 was deemed as insufficient RNA quality to provide a subtyping result. A value between 64 and 128 was considered to be borderline quality since it meets previously published thresholds for RNA quality within clinical research studies, 18 were considered to be borderline. Laboratory work was carried out at Uppsala University Hospital according to SOP provided by Nanostring. Data was analyzed by Nanostring (we did not obtain the algorithm).
The IHC stainings for CD10, BCL2, BCL6, MUM1 and MYC were performed at the different sites according to routine procedures in each diagnostic laboratory. The stainings were re-evaluated semi-quantitatively by each site's hematopathologists (authors MH, MF, MA, SBE, HMP). The
Hans algorithm was applied to classify tumors as GCB or non-GCB by IHC, and included CD10, BCL6 and MUM1 stainings with a cut-off of 30% positive tumor cells. For MYC, a cut-off of 40% was applied and for BCL2 50%. Since insufficient material was a problem in a majority of the cases, FISH analyses for BCL2 and MYC were not performed.
The following subgroups were defined according to GEP or IHC:
1. ABC = ABC type defined by GEP and classified with the Lymph2Cx assay. Additional COO groups were studied and are presented in the supplementary material (Supplementary methods Tables S1 and S2).

The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Regional Ethical Committees in 


Three hundred and fifty-one cases were investigated with IHC markers to determine COO according to the Hans algorithm, where 180 cases (51%) were classified as GCB-IHC, and 171 cases (49%) as non-GCB (Table S3 ). In total, 315 cases were successfully investigated with the NanoString Lymph2Cx assay to determine COO, whereas 44 cases failed to pass the analysis due to insufficient RNA quality. One hundred and sixty-eight cases (53%) were classified as GCB-GEP, 105 cases (33%) as ABC, and 42 cases (13%) as UC according to the Lymph2Cx assay. 
.03
.72
Yes 132 (37) 39 (37) 55 (33) 73 (43) 57 (32) 35 (40) 78 (35) No 207 (58) 62 (59) 101 (60) 88 (51) 114 (63) 50 (57) 127 (58) Missing 20 (6) 4 (4) 12 (7) 10 (6) 9 (5) 3 (3) 15 (7) ≥2 age-adjusted IPI (7) 15 (9) 12 (7) 7 (8) 16 (7) Stage ≥ III .37
.63
.95
Yes 198 (55) 61 (58) 86 (51) 98 (57) 98 (54) 51 (58) 124 (56) No 140 (39) 38 (36) 70 (42) 63 (37) 72 (40) 32 (36) 82 (37) Missing 21 (6) 6 (6) 12 (7) 10 (6) 10 (6) 5 (6) 14 (6) High LDH (7) 9 (5) 8 (4) 4 (5) 12 (5) (Continues) .84
.51
Yes 107 (30) 36 (34) 44 (26) 55 (32) 52 (29) 30 (34) 63 (29) No 167 (47) 45 (43) 83 (49) 82 (48) 84 (47) 40 (45) 106 (48) Missing 85 (24) 24 (23) 41 (24) 34 (20) 44 (24) 18 (20) 51 (23) High expression of MYC .052
.86
.04
Yes 44 (12) 20 (12) 17 (16) 23 (13) 21 (12) 16 (18) 24 (11) No 117 (33) 60 (36) 21 (20) 57 (33) 59 (33) 21 (24) 77 (35) Missing (37) 46 (52) 85 (39) No 61 (17) 38 (23) 8 (8) 23 (13) 37 (21) 6 (7) 45 (20) Missing 147 (41) 68 (40) 47 (45) 64 (37) 76 (42) 36 (41) 90 (41) Double expression of MYC and BCL2
.01
.12
.009
Yes 33 (9) 15 (14) 13 (8) 21 (12) 12 (7) 14 (16) 17 (8) no 136 (38) 25 (24) 72 (43) 63 (37) 72 (40) 23 (26) assay (Table S3 ). 
Patients classified as ABC according to the Lymph2Cx assay had significantly inferior five-year survival rates at 58% for OS and 56% for PFS. This is compared with 71% for OS and 69% for PFS in the GCB-GEP group, and 82% for OS and 78% for PFS in the UC-group ( Figure 1A,D) . Patients categorized as non-GCB by the Hans algorithm showed inferior five-year survival rates at 65% for OS and 62% for PFS, compared with 72% for OS and 71% for PFS in the GCB-IHC group (Figure 1B,E) . Patients grouped as ABC according to the Lymph2Cx assay and non-GCB by the Hans algorithm demonstrated inferior five-year survival rates at 53% for OS and 51% for PFS. This is compared with 74% for OS and 72% for PFS in cases that were not ABC and non-GCB combined ( Figure 1C,F ). There were other variables associated with inferior OS ( Table 2 ) and PFS ( 
Of 42 cases categorized as UC according to the Lymph2Cx assay, 33 (79%) were non-GCB and 9 (21%) were GCB-IHC according to the Hans algorithm (Table S3 ). There was a higher proportion of UC with a high expression of MUM1, and a lower proportion with a high expression of CD10, compared with GCB-GEP and ABC cases according to the Lymph2Cx assay (data not shown). Although not statistically significant, tendencies were observed that a higher proportion of UC cases were younger (aged <60 years [P = .09]), and more often presented with B-symptoms (P = .06) compared with GCB-GEP and ABC cases. There were no major differences regarding double expression of MYC and BCL2 (Table S4 ). In supplementary analyses, UC patients showed no statistically significant associations with OS or PFS, in either univariate or in multivariate analysis (Tables S1 and S2 ).
Using GEP to determine the COO of DLBCL is undoubtedly the golden standard, but it requires fresh-frozen material. Thus, it is also of great importance in order to determine the COO with high accuracy on FFPE material, since fresh-frozen material is rarely available in clinical practice. 20 Visco-Young algorithm uses a five-marker model of CD10, GCET1, FOXP1, MUM1, and BCL6. 13 Nevertheless, no IHC algorithm will be 100% concordant with GEP regarding COO, and no IHC algorithm has so far been able to identify the UC cases. Thus, determining COO by GEP is the only way to identify the UC cases.
In our study, the survival outcome for the different GEP groups was well in concordance with previous studies 19, 22, 23 translocations characterized the UC subgroup and were associated with a favorable survival outcome. 37 These findings suggest that further subgrouping of ABC, GCB and UC, by including genetic data might be necessary in order to correctly risk stratify patients with DLBCL.
Our study was performed on a large cohort of DLBCL patients from Sweden and Denmark, where the characterization of COO has been performed both by IHC and GEP on FFPE material. The patient cohort in our study was not truly population-based, but rather based on cases where enough tissue material was available, which may have caused a selection-bias. Furthermore, in DLBCL patients whose tumors are located in deep anatomical sites where surgical biopsy is sparse are not included in most studies, which could add to the question of representativeness. 38 However, clinical characteristics and survival were quite comparable to other studies of DLBCL patients. 8, 25, 39, 40 We did not prepare new slides for the IHC stainings, but instead used the original ones performed by the primary laboratories. Still, the diagnoses and staining results were reevaluated and scored by the participating hematopathologists.
Our cases were classified according to the 2008 WHO classification, and very few were investigated for the presence of MYC, BCL2 and BCL6 rearrangements, which may represent a confounding bias. It was difficult to obtain material for the IHC stainings for MYC and BCL2, only half of the cases were investigated, but this is also observed in large prospective randomized multi-center studies. 8 Obtaining more material for FISH-analyses would have been even more troublesome and would have selected cases with plentiful material. However, this is also the case for similar studies that included patients with HGBCL diagnosed prior to 2016. And, our study is no exception, and our cases have been reported as DLBCL according to the 2008 WHO classification, in order to make our study comparable with other studies. Presumably, some cases of HGBCL with MYC and BCL2 and/or BCL6 rearrangements may be included in our cohort. But, cases with "B-cell lymphoma unclassifiable with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma", according to the 2008 WHO classification, were not included. Many of the "double-hit" lymphomas belong to this category, as does cases with transformation from previous follicular lymphoma, which were also excluded from our study. Thus, "double-hit" lymphomas probably have limited impact on our results. Lastly, the primary aim with our study was to compare the utility of COO classification by the Lymph2Cx assay and IHC, according to the Hans algorithm of de novo DLBCL according to the 2008 WHO classification, not to study the prognostic impact of "double-hit" lymphomas.
In conclusion, GEP combined with IHC to classify cases as ABC/non-GCB is the best predictor of inferior survival, in both uni-and multivariate analyses, probably by identifying cases at the extreme ends of the GCB and ABC spectrum. We also found that cases classified by IHC as non-GCB, were more often GCB-GEP or UC than vice versa for the GCB-IHC cases. Thus, IHC appears to be insufficient to identify cases of the ABC genotype. The Lymph2Cx assay is a robust assay that can be applicable on FFPE material in a clinical setting, in addition to conventional IHC, and is thus possible to implement on a routine clinical basis. Moreover, single as well as double expression of MYC and BCL2 significantly differed between ABC and GCB groups, which affected survival and may thus contribute to the dismal outcome for the ABC group. We propose that both GEP by the Lymph2Cx assay and IHC should be applied to determine COO in order to identify patients with the worst prognosis.
The current standard treatment for locally advanced rectal cancer (RC) is preoperative chemoradiotherapy (CRT). Although CRT is known to improve local control of the tumor, it is also reported to cause postoperative complications and pelvic dysfunction. [1] [2] [3] [4] To maintain the function of pelvic nerves and muscles, neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) was recently established. 5, 6 Tailored treatments, in which choosing or combining CRT and NAC is made on a case-by-case basis, will be significant in the future. 7 It has been reported that tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) determine not only antitumor surveillance but also the treatment efficacy of neoadjuvant therapy. 8, 9 Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes positively control tumor immunity and their marked infiltration was reported to be associated with better clinical outcomes in various cancers. [10] [11] [12] [13] High accumulation of intratumoral CD8 + T cells shows favorable prognosis in RC patients with or without preoperative CRT. 14, 15 However, no study has evaluated the immunological environment of RC after NAC. Evaluating changes in the immunological environment after neoadjuvant therapies could reveal immune cell components associated with treatment efficacy and patient prognosis. Currently, combination studies with immunological checkpoint inhibitors, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and CRT are underway for various tumors to enhance the antitumor immune response. 7, 16, 17 Although some clinical trials revealed that immunological check point inhibitors, such as mAbs against programmed cell death-1, are effective against various cancers, [16] [17] [18] most advanced colorectal cancers, excluding high microsatellite instability colorectal cancer, are insensitive to immunological checkpoint inhibitors. 19 Thus, assessing the immunological environment and its effect on antitumor immune response after neoadjuvant therapies could provide a proof of concept for the benefits of immune checkpoint inhibitors in combination with CRT and NAC for advanced RC treatment.
Recently, multiplex fluorescence immunohistochemistry (mFIHC) has emerged as an effective tool for comprehensive analysis of immune cell type in the tumor microenvironment. [20] [21] [22] Previously, studies evaluated stromal or intratumoral lymphocytes in addition to analyzing TIL subsets and have reported that TIL localization in the epithelial compartment of tumors is important because nonspecific infiltration of lymphocytes into the tumor stroma is often observed after treatment. 23, 24 The nuclear protein Ki67 is commonly used to assess cell proliferation and measure the proliferative capacity of tumor cells and T cells. Ki67 expression is observed during all active phases of cell division but not during DNA repair or the cell quiescent phase. 25 For some chronic diseases, such as HIV infection, cancer, and autoimmune diseases, the Ki67 expression pattern in T cells is used to evaluate antigen-specific T cell expansion. 26, 27 In this study,using mFIHC analysis by staining with opal fluorescence molecules and multispectra imaging, we analyzed the tumor microenvironment and immunological features of RC, including T cell activation by Ki67 expression, and elucidated the histological alterations mediated by NAC and CRT compared with surgery alone.
Moreover, we evaluated the correlation between TIL subsets and recurrence-free survival (RFS) to find novel prognostic markers after neoadjuvant therapies.

Ninety-nine locally advanced RC patients (T3 or T4, N0 or T any, N1-2) who had received preoperative therapy between January 2001 and June 2014 at the National Cancer Center Hospital East (NCCHE, Chiba, Japan) were recruited. Of these, 48 and 51 cases received preoperative CRT and NAC, respectively. The CRT group received preoperative fluoropyrimidine-based chemotherapy (in- 
Preoperative clinical staging and pathological staging were carried out according to the UICC classification (7th edition). The local treatment effect was evaluated by tumor regression grade (TRG) according to the method described by the American Joint Committee on Cancer and the College of American Pathologists. 28, 29 Other variables obtained from the pathology report were pathological stage (pStage and ypStage), lymphatic invasion (LYI), vascular invasion (VI), and perineural invasion (PNI).
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor blocks and corresponding slides stained with H&E from the 188 cases were collected from the institutional pathology archive. For tissue microarray (TMA), a gastrointestinal pathologist selected 2 target areas from the center of the tumor and the invasive margin, after which a total of 4 tumor cores per case were picked up using a punch tip (φ 2 mm; Azumaya) ( Figure   S1A ,B). 30, 31 One TMA block contained 48 tissue cores; in total, 16 TMA sets consisting of 768 core specimens were prepared for this study.
To identify mismatch repair (MMR) status, we performed conventional immunohistochemistry (IHC) using MLH1 (1:500; BD Pharmingen), MSH2 (1:50; Calbiochem), MSH6 (1:1000; BD Pharmingen), and PMS2 (1:50; Dako, Santa Clara, CA) Abs. Immunohistochemistry was carried out on 4-µm thick sections obtained from the TMA block ( Figure   S1C ). Tumor cell nuclei that did not display any brown staining for the abovementioned markers were considered MMR deficient (dMMR).
Tissue sections (4-µm thick) obtained from TMA blocks were subjected to mFIHC staining using the PerkinElmer Opal Kit (PerkinElmer).
The Abs, dilutions, and activation conditions used are listed in Table   S1 . Images were captured using an automated multisector imaging system (Vectra version 3.0; PerkinElmer). An image analysis program (Inform; PerkinElmer) was used to segment tumor tissues into carcinoma and stromal areas and to detect immune cells with specific phenotypes, after which the distribution of immune cells was analyzed ( Figure S2 ). Training sessions for tissue segmentation and phenotype recognition were carried out repeatedly until the algorithm reached the level of confidence recommended by the program supplier (at least 90% accuracy) before performing the final evaluation. 24, 32 After phenotyping typical CD4 + and CD8 + cells using Inform software, gated CD3 + populations by mean fluorescence intensity of CD3, CD3 + CD4 + , and CD3 + CD8 + cells were determined as CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells, respectively. A similar gating strategy was used for the analysis of Ki67 high population in cytokeratin positive (CK + ) cells, CD4 + T cells, and CD8 + T cells using an analytical program (Spotfire version 7.8; TIBCO Software; Figure S3 ). The area of each tissue category, carcinoma and stroma, was evaluated to assess the density of lymphocytes, represented by (number of lymphocytes) / (pixel area) in each tumor core; an average value of 4 tumor cores was determined. T cells in the carcinoma and stromal areas were defined as carcinoma T cells and stromal T cells, respectively. The ratio of carcinoma to stromal T cells (carcinoma / stromal ratio) was calculated using the ratio of the density of carcinoma T cells to that of stromal T cells. 


Patient characteristics and clinicopathological features are listed in Table 1 . There were no significant differences in age, sex, distance from anal verge, clinical TNM stage, pathological TNM stage, or PNI between the 3 groups. Lymphatic invasion was observed less frequently in the CRT group than in the control group. Vascular invasion was also found less frequently in the CRT and NAC groups than in the control group.
Tumor regression grade in the CRT group was better than in the NAC group. Eleven patients (5.9%) were dMMR, of which 3 patients (7.3%)
were in the CRT group, 2 (4.3%) in the NAC group, and 6 (5.9%) in the control group. There were no significant differences in RFS based on neoadjuvant therapies (3-year RFS, CRT 60.6% vs NAC 63.0%; P = .976).
Using mFIHC analysis of tumor sections with nuclei, CK, and Ki67 staining, we compared the treatment effects of CRT and NAC based on residual carcinoma areas and their growth activity ( Figure 1A ).
Calculation of the total carcinoma area by Inform software was highly correlated with TRG ( Figure 1B) . Interestingly, within the same TRG, the individual regions of residual carcinomas in the CRT group ( Figure 1A , center panel) tended to be smaller than those in the NAC group ( Figure 1A , right panel), although the total residual carcinoma area was comparable between them ( Figure 1B ). Patients who received CRT had smaller carcinoma masses (<0.01 mm 2 ) than those who received NAC and had the same TRG ( Figure 1C ). To examine the inhibition of residual carcinoma growth by each neoadjuvant therapy, we evaluated Ki67 expression in CK + cells and found that the growth activity of CK + cells was significantly inhibited by CRT, but not by NAC ( Figure 1D ). Moreover, the proportion of Ki67 high in CK + cells was not altered by the local treatment effects of either CRT or NAC ( Figure 1E ).
Representative features of CD3/CD4 and CD3/CD8 double staining for surgery alone, CRT, and NAC specimens are shown in Figure 2A , B.
Compared with the control group, the densities of carcinoma CD4 + T cells, carcinoma CD8 + T cells, and stromal CD8 + T cells were significantly increased after NAC. In the CRT group, the densities of carcinoma CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells were preserved compared with those in the control group, whereas the densities of stromal CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells were significantly reduced ( Figure 2C , D).
After CRT, the carcinoma / stromal ratio of both CD4 + and CD8 + T cells was significantly higher than in the control group, whereas after NAC, only CD8 + T cells tended to infiltrate the carcinoma area ( Figure 2E ).
Next, we assessed the population of Ki67 high T cells in each tissue area to assess T cell activity. Representative images of Ki67 staining in CD4 + and CD8 + T cells are shown in Figure 3A Figure 3C-F) . Both CRT and NAC groups showed no- Figure 3G ). 

Subsequently, to evaluate the role of T cell subsets on local treatment effects, we evaluated the correlation between T cell subset localization and TRG. The density of each T cell subset for each TRG patient is shown in Figure S4 . After CRT, the densities of stromal T cells in all TRG patients were decreased, whereas the densities of carcinoma T cells in TRG1 patients were maintained. After NAC, the densities of carcinoma T cells tended to increase in all TRG patients; stromal T cells showed a similar increasing trend, with the exception of TRG1 patients. The carcinoma / stromal ratios showed more prominent results and were significantly higher in TRG1 patients after both neoadjuvant therapies than in the control group ( Figure 4A, B) . In particular, there was a marked increase in carcinoma / stromal ratios of Ki67 high subsets compared with that of total subsets ( Figure 4C, D) . Although CD4 + and CD8 + T cell density in the carcinoma or stromal areas showed different behaviors between CRT and NAC, T cells infiltrated the carcinoma area more readily after both neoadjuvant therapies, especially in patients who experienced significant tumor regression.
Because the Foxp3 transcriptional factor is well known as a marker of regulatory T cells (Tregs)-a subset of CD4 + T cells that have a strong immunosuppressive function 34-37 -we examined the effects of CRT and NAC on Treg subsets by Foxp3 staining ( Figure   S5A ). The proportion of Foxp3 high Tregs in the stromal CD4 + T cell subset was decreased after neoadjuvant therapies ( Figure S5B, C) , which was associated with the treatment effects (TRG) of both neoadjuvant therapies ( Figure S5D ). In contrast, the proportion of the Treg subset in carcinomas did not change among the 3 groups.
We also analyzed the role of macrophages as immunosuppressive cells ( Figure S6A, B ). CD68 + macrophages increased significantly after NAC and tended to increase after CRT ( Figure S6C ). Analysis of the CD68 + population based on the M1 (CD68 + CD204 − ) and M2 (CD68 + CD204 + ) macrophage phenotypes revealed that M1 levels increased significantly after both CRT and NAC ( Figure S6D ).
To assess the effects of T cell subsets on prognosis, we classified patients in the CRT and the NAC groups as high or low cases using the median of T cell densities and carcinoma / stromal ratios.
Univariate Cox proportional hazards analysis indicated that the densities of both Ki67 high CD4 + and CD8 + T cells were associated with better prognosis; the high densities of carcinoma Ki67 high CD4 + T cells after CRT and stromal Ki67 high CD8 + T cells after NAC could significantly inhibit recurrence. The densities of CD4 + and CD8 + T cells in the CRT group and CD8 + T cells in the NAC group tended to be associated with better prognoses, although the differences were not statistically significant. In contrast, there were no differences in the carcinoma / stromal ratios between the high and low cases ( Table 2) .
Finally, we applied the univariate analysis and the following multivariate Cox proportional hazards analysis to assessing the importance of various covariates in pathological features and T cell subsets for RFS. We found that LYI as well as the densities of carcinoma Ki67 high CD4 + T cells after CRT and stromal Ki67 high CD8 + T cells after NAC were significantly independent predictive factors (Table 3) . Kaplan-Meier analysis of RFS using the density of these T cell subsets in both the CRT and NAC groups is shown in Figure 5 . 

via inflammatory responses and is accompanied by an upregulation of chemokines. 42 However, this study and our previous reports found that the T cell density in tumor tissues decreased after CRT. 43 Conversely, Shinto et al 15 reported that the number of stromal CD8 + cells in RC increased after neoadjuvant CRT. These discrepancies in immunological observations after CRT might be due to the radiation dose and interval time between the last irradiation to resection; in activity by CRT (abscopal effect) was reported to require the function of helper CD4 + T cells through the activation of tumor-infiltrating antigen-presenting cells (APCs), such as tumor-associated macrophages and dendritic cells. 46, 47 However, the activation of APCs after NAC would be induced nonspecifically without the help of CD4 + T cells because a robust infiltration of T cells accompanied by the inflammatory response was observed in the local tumor site. 42 Therefore, enhancement of CTL activity could occur independently of CD4 + T cell activation during NAC.
Regarding the role of the immunosuppressive population, we found that the proportion of carcinoma Tregs did not change among the 3 groups, whereas stromal Tregs were significantly decreased and accompanied by tumor regression. The Treg density after NAC increased, but this was associated with the increase in total CD4 + T cells. These findings suggest that the selective depletion of stromal Tregs by neoadjuvant therapies leads to the infiltration of activated CTL, followed by local tumor elimination. After analyzing tumor-infiltrating macrophages, we found that both neoadjuvant therapies increased polarization towards M1 macrophages, which have been reported to robustly express MHC class II. 48 Thus, we theorized that both CRT and NAC can polarize tumor-infiltrating macrophages, resulting in improvement of the tumor immune environment, which is similar to the depletion of stromal Tregs.
Although neoadjuvant therapies could improve the local tumor immune environment, they did not contribute to the prolongation of RFS (Table S2 ). We found that lower densities of Ki67 high CD4 + and CD8 + T cells tended to correlate with a lower infiltration of Tregs (data not shown), resulting in a shorter RFS. Further experiments are warranted to uncover the role of CD4 + T cells in the antitumor immune response during neoadjuvant therapies, especially NAC.
In summary, we found that the evaluation of activated T cells expressing Ki67 and their localization in tumors is a reliable immunological marker for predicting the prognosis of locally advanced RC patients who received neoadjuvant therapy. Our results were also confirmed and practically validated by H&E staining and immunohistochemistry double staining ( Figure S7 ). Previously, accumulation of mononuclear cells around the carcinoma nest observed by H&E staining was reported as a predictor of favorable prognosis. 49 This is in agreement with our findings on immunological features identified by mFIHC, which were associated with patient prognosis. There are some limitations to our study, however. It has been reported that MMR status could provide important information, eg, dMMR shows increased tumor mutation burden associated with high T cell infiltration. 50 However, in our study, we could not find any significant difference in the TILs between dMMR and proficient MMR across all groups (data not shown). We believe that the small population of dMMR in all groups was why dMMR status had less impact on TIL status. Moreover, this is a retrospective study that only used resected tumor tissues from a patient cohort enrolled in our hospital. There were no data on TILs before neoadjuvant therapies. In addition, although the median value was used as a threshold for separation of patients presenting with a high or low accumulation of lymphocytes, the threshold of T cells expressing Ki67 associated with prognosis has not been adequately studied. Therefore, a prospective study to assess postoperative prognosis following neoadjuvant therapies is warranted. Nevertheless, our findings can provide important insights for determining advanced RC prognosis after neoadjuvant therapies.
This article is included in the gateway. RPackage Given a target (response or dependent) variable Y of n measurements and a set X of p features (predictor or independent variables) the problem of feature (or variable) selection (FS) is to identify the minimal set of features with the highest predictability a on the target variable (outcome) of interest. The natural question that arises, is why should researchers and practitioners perform FS. The answer to this is for a variety of reasons 1 , such as: a) many features may be expensive (and/or unnecessary) to measure, especially in the clinical and medical domains; b) FS may result in more accurate models (of higher predictability) by removing noise while treating the curse-of-dimensionality; c) the final produced parsimonious models are computationally cheaper and often easier to understand and interpret; d) future experiments can benefit from prior feature selection tasks and provide more insight into the problem of interest, its characteristics and structure. e) FS is indissolubly connected with causal inference that tries to identify the system's causal mechanism that generated the data.
R contains thousands of packages, but only a small portion of them are dedicated to the task of FS, yet offering limited or narrow capabilities. For example, some packages accept few or specific types of target variables (e.g. binary and multi-class only). This leaves many types of target variables, e.g. percentages, left censored, positive valued, matched case-control data, etc., untreated. The availability of regression models for some types of data is rather small. Count data is such an example, for which Poisson regression is the only model considered in nearly all R packages. Most algorithms including statistical tests offer limited statistical tests, e.g. likelihood ratio test only. Almost all available FS algorithms are devised for large sample sized data, thus they cannot be used in many biological settings where the number of observations rarely (or never in some cases) exceeds 100, but the number of features is in the order of tens of thousands. Finally, some packages are designed for high volume data b only.
In this paper we present MXM c 2 ; an R package that overcomes the above shortcomings. It contains many FS algorithms d , which can handle numerous and diverse types of target variables, while offering a pool of regression models to choose from and feed the FS algorithms. There is a plethora of statistical tests (likelihood-ratio, Wald, permutation based) and information criteria (BIC and eBIC) to plug into the FS algorithms. Algorithms that work with small and large sample sized data, algorithms that have been customized for high volume data, and an algorithm that returns multiple sets of statistically equivalent features are some of the key characteristics of MXM.
Over the next sections, a brief qualitative comparison of MXM with other packages available on CRAN and Bioconductor is presented, its (dis)advantages are discussed, its FS algorithms and related functions are mentioned. Finally a demonstration takes place, applying some FS algorithms available in MXM on real high dimensional data. a Predictive performance metrics include AUC, accuracy, mean squared error, mean absolute error, concordance index, F score, proportion of variance explained, etc. b In statistics and in the R packages the term "big data" is used to refer to such data. In the computer science terminology, big data are of much higher volume and require specific technology. For this reason we chose to use the term "high volume" instead of "big data".
When searching for FS packages on CRAN and Bioconductor repositories using the keywords "feature selection", "variable selection", "selection", "screening" and "LASSO" e , we detected 184 R packages until the 7th of May 2018 f . Table 1 shows the frequency of the target variable types those packages accept g , while Figure 1 shows the frequency of R packages whose FS algorithms can treat at least k types of target variables, for k = 1, 2, . . . , 8, of those presented in Table 1 . Table 2 presents the frequency of pairwise types of target variables offered in R packages and Table 3 contains information on packages allowing for less frequent regression models. Most packages offer FS algorithms that are oriented towards specific types of target variables, methodology and regression models, offering at most 3-4 options. Out of these 184 packages, 65 (35.32%) offer LASSO type FS algorithms, while 19 (10.32%) address the problem of FS from the Bayesian perspective. Only 2 (1.08%) R packages treat the case of FS with multiple datasets h while only 4 (2.17%) packages are devised for high volume data. We highlight the fact that especially on hrefhttps://cran.r-project.org/CRAN, packages are uploaded at a super-linear rate. Bioconductor is more strict with the addition of new packages. The phenomenon of abandoned or not maintained packages for a long time is not at all unusual. Such an example is "biospear", removed from CRAN (archived) in the 30th of April 2018. On the other hand we manualy added in our list a package that performs FS without mentioning it in its title. g We manually examined each package to identify the types of target variables it accepts and regression models it offers.
h Instead of having a target variable and a set of features, one can have two or more sets of target variables and features. The algorithm we have devised for this case uses simultaneously all target variables and sets of features Table 4 summarizes the types of target variables treated by MXM' FS algorithms along with the appropriate regression models that can be employed. The list is not exhaustive, as in some cases the type of the predictor variables (continuous or categorical) affects the decision of using a regression model or a test (Pearson and Spearman for continuous and G 2 test of independence for categorical). With percentages for example, MXM offers numerous regression models to plug into its FS algorithms: beta regression, quasi binomial regression or any linear regression model (robust or not) after transforming the percentages using the logistic transformation. For repeated measurements (correlated data), there are two options offered, the GeneralisedGeneralised Linear Mixed Models (GLMM) and Generalised Estimating Equations (GEE) which can also be used with various types of target variables, not mentioned here. We emphasize that MXM is the only package that covers all types of response variables mentioned on Table 1 , many types of which are not available in any other FS package, such as left censored data for example. MXM also covers 3 out 4 cases that appear on Table 3 .
Most of the currently available FS algorithms in the MXM package have been developed by the creators and authors of the package (see the last column of positive rates 10 . MMPC formed the basis of Max Min Hill Climbing (MMHC) 11 , a prototypical algorithm for learning the structure of a Bayesian network which outperformed all other Bayesian network learning algorithms with categorical data. For time-to-event and nominal categorical target variable, MMPC 12 , and 13 respectively, outperformed or was on par with LASSO and other FS algorithms. SES 2 was contrasted against LASSO with continuous, binary and survival target variables, resulting in similar conclusions as before. With temporal and time-course data, SES 14 outperformed the LASSO algorithm 15 both in predictive performance and computational efficiency. FBED 5 was compared to LASSO for the task of binary classification with sparse data exhibiting performance similar to that of LASSO. As for gOMP, our experiments have showed very promising results, achieving similar or better performance, while enjoying higher computational efficiency than LASSO 6 .
The main advantage of MXM is that all FS algorithms accept numerous and diverse types of target variables. MMPC, SES and FBED treat all types of target variables presented in Table 4 , while gOMP handles fewer types i .
MXM is the only R package that offers many different regression models to be employed by the FS algorithms, even for the same type of response variable, such as Poisson, quasi Poisson, negative binomial and zero inflated Poisson regression for count data. For repeated measurements, the user has the option of using GLMM or the GEE methodology (the latter with more options in the correlation structure) and for time-toevent data, Cox, Weibull and exponential regression models are the available options.
A range of statistical tests and methodologies to select the features is offered. Instead of the usual log-likelihood ratio test, the user has the option to use the Wald test or produce a p-value based on permutations. The latter is useful and advised when the sample size is small, emphasizing the need for use of MMPC and SES, both of which are designed for small sample sized datasets. FBED on the other hand, appart from the log-likelihood ratio test offers the possibility of using information criteria, such as BIC 16 and eBIC 17 .
No p-values correction (e.g. Benjamini and Hochberg 18 ,) is applied. Specifically MMPC (and SES essentially) has been proved to control the False Discovery Rate 19 . However, we allow for permutation-based p-values when performing MMPC and SES. FBED addresses this issue either by removing the non-significant variables or by using information criteria such as the extended BIC 17 . Borboudakis The Wald and log-likelihood ratio tests are asymptotic tests. In addition, the fitted regression models require large sample size. With small sample sizes, the fitted regression models must not contain many predictor variables in order not to estimate many parameters.
To address these issues both MMPC and SES perform conditional independence tests using subsets of selected variables, thus reducing the number of estimated parameters.
Not all MXM's FS algorithms and all regression models used are computationally efficient. The (algorithmic) order of complexity of the FS algortihms is comparable to state-of-art FS algorithms, but the nature of the other algorithms is such that many regression models must be fit increasing the computational burden. In addition, R itself does not allow for further speed improvement. For example, MMPC can be slow for many regression models, such as negative binomial or ordinal regression for which we rely on implementations in other R packages. gOMP, on the other hand, is the most efficient algorithm available in MXM k gOMP superseded the LASSO implementation in the package glmnet 24 in both time and performance., because it is residual based and few regression models are fit. With clustered/longitudinal data, SES (and MMPC) were shown to scale to tens of thousands and be dramatically faster than LASSO 14 . Computational efficiency is also programming language-dependent. Most of the algorithms are currently written in R and we are constantly working towards transferring them to C++ so as to decrease the computational cost significantly.
It is impossible to cover all cases of target variables; we have no algorithms for time series, and do not treat multi-state time-to-event target variables for example, yet we regularly search for R packages that treat other types of target variables and link them to MXM l . All algorithms are limited to linear or generalised linear relationships, and we plan to address this issue in the future. The gOMP algorithm does not accept all types of target variables and works only with continuous predictor variables. This is a limitation of the algorithm, but we plan to address this in the future as well.
Cross-validation functions currently exist only for MMPC, SES and gOMP, but performance metrics are not available for all target variables. When the target variable is binary AUC, accuracy or the F score can be utilised, when the target takes continuous values, the mean squared error, the mean absolute error or the proportion of variance explained can be used, whereas with survival target variables the concordance index can be computed. Left censored data, is an example of target variable whose predictive performance estimation is not offered. A last drawback is that currently MXM does not offer graphical visualization of the algorithms and of the final produced models.
Which FS algorithm from MXM to use and when In terms of sample size, FBED and gOMP are generally advised for large-sample-sized datasets, whereas MMPC and SES are designed mainly for small-sample-sized datasets m . In the case of a large sample size and few features, FSR or BSR are also suggested. In terms of number of features, gOMP is the only algorithm that scales up when the number of features is in the order of the hundreds of thousands. gOMP is also suitable for high volume data that contain a high number of features, really large sample sizes or both. FBED has been customized to handle high volume data as well, but with large sample sizes and only a few thousand features. If the user is interested in discovering more than one set of features, SES is suitable for returning multiple solutions, which are statistically equivalent. With multiple datasets n , both MMPC and SES are currently the only two algorithms that can handle some cases (both the target variable and the set of features are continuous). As for the availability of the target variable, MMPC, SES and FBED handle all types of target variables available in MXM, listed in Table 4 , while gOMP accepts fewer types of target variables. Regarding the type of features, gOMP currently works with continuous features only, whereas all other algorithms accept both continuous and categorical features. All this information is presented in Table 5 .

MXM is an R package that makes use of (depends or imports) other packages that offer regression models or utility functions.
• bigmemory: for large volume data.
• doParallel: for parallel computations.
k Based on our experiments 6 . l Currently, with little effort, one should be able to plug-in their own regression model into some of the algorithms. We plan to expand this possibility for all algorithms. m To the best of our knowledge there are not many FS algorithms dealing with small sample sized data.
n Instead of having one dataset only to analyze one might have multiple datasets from different sources. We do not combine all datasets into a larger one, neither perform FS for each dataset separately. Each step of the MMPC and SES algorithms is performed simultaneously to all datasets.
• coxme: for frailty models.
• geepack: for GEE models.
• lme4: for mixed models.
• MASS: for negative binomial regression, ordinal regression and robust (MM type) regression.
• nnet: for multinomial regression.
• ordinal: for ordinal regression.
• quantreg: for quantile regression.
• stats (built-in package): for generalised linear models.
• survival: for survival regression and Tobit regression.
• Rfast: for computational efficiency.
MXM contains functions for returning the selected features for a range of hyper-parameters for each algorithm. For example, mmpc.path runs MMPC for multiple combinations of threshold and max k , and gomp.path runs gOMP for a range of stopping values. The exception is with FBED, for which the user can give a vector of values of K in fbed.reg instead of a single value. Unfortunately, the path of significance levels cannot be determined at a single run o .
MMPC and SES have been implemented in such a way that the user has the option to store the results (p-values and test statistic values) from a single run in a hash object. In subsequent runs, with different hyperparameters this can lead to significant amounts of computational savings because it avoids performing tests that have been already been performed. These two algorithms give the user an extra advantage. They can search for the subset of feature(s) that rendered one more specific feature(s) independent of the target variable by using the function certificate.of.exclusion.
FBED, SES and MMPC are three algorithms that share common grounds. The list with the results of the univariate associations (test statistic and logged p-value) can be calculated from either algorithm and be passed onto any of them. When one is interested in running many algorithms, this can reduce the computational cost significantly. Note also that the univariate associations in MMPC and SES can be calculated in parallel, with multi-core machines. More FS related functions can be found in MXM's reference manual and vignettes section available on CRAN. it is ready to be used without internet connection. The system requirements are documented on MXM's webpage on CRAN.

We will now demonstrate some FS algorithms available in MXM, using real datasets. Specifically we will show the relevant commands and describe part of their output. With user-friendliness taken into consideration, extra attention has been put in keeping the functions within the MXM package as consistent as the nature of the algorithms allows for, in terms of syntax, required input objects and parameter arguments. Table 6 contains a list of the current FS algorithms, but we will demonstrate some of them here. In all cases, the arguments "target", "dataset" and "test" refer to the target variable, set of features and type of regression model to be used. o We plan to implement this more efficiently in the future 
The first dataset we used concerns breast cancer, with 295 women selected from the fresh-frozen-tissue bank of the Netherlands Cancer Institute 25 . The dataset contains 70 features and the target variable is time to event, with 63 censored values p . We need this information, to be passed as a numerical variable indicating the status (0 = censored, 1 = not censored), for example (1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, . . . ). We will make use of the R package survival 26 for running the appropriate models (Cox and Weibull regression) and show the FBED algorithm with the default arguments. Part of the output is presented below. Information on the selected features, their test statistic and their associated logarithmically transformed p-value q , along with some information on the number of regression models fitted is displayed. The first column of $res denotes the selected features, i.e. the 28th and the 6th feature were selected. The second and third columns refer to the feature(s)'s associated test statistic and p-value. The $info informs the user on the value of K used, the number of selected features and the number of tests (or regression models) performed. p Censoring occurs when partial information about some observations is available. It might be the case that some individuals will experience the event after completion of the study. Or when an individual is not part of the study for anymore, for a reason other than the occurrence of the event of interest. In a study about cancer, for example, some patients may die of another cause, e.g. another disease or car accident for example. The survival times of those patients has been recorded, but offer limited information.
q The logarithm of the p-values is computed and return in order to avoid small p-values (less than the machine epsilon 10 −16 ) being rounded to 0. This is a crucial and key element of the algorithms because they rely on the correct ordering of the p-values.
The above output was produced using Cox regression. If we used Weibull regression instead (test = "testIndWR"), the output would be slightly different. Only one feature (the 28th) was selected, and FBED performed 75 tests (based upon 75 fitted regression models). The element res presented below is one of the elements of the returned output. The first column shows the selected variables in order of inclusion and the second column is the deviance of each regression model. The first line refers to the regression model with 0 predictor variables (constant term only). 

The next dataset we will use is NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus accession number GSE9105 28 , which contains 22,283 features about skeletal muscles from 12 normal, healthy glucose-tolerant individuals exposed to acute physiological hyperinsulinemia, measured at 3 distinct time points. Following 14 , we will also use SES and not FBED because the sample size is small. The grouping variable that identifies the subject along with the time points is necessary in our case. If the data were clustered data, i.e. families, where no time is involved, the argument "reps" would not be provided. The user has the option to use GLMM 29 or GEE 30 . The output of SES (and of MMPC) is long and verbose, and thus we present the first 10 set of equivalent signatures. The first row is the set of selected features, and every other row is an equivalent set. In this example, the last four columns are the same and only the first changes. This means, that the feature 2683 has 9 statistically equivalent features, (2, 7, 10, ...). 
The next dataset we consider is from Human cerebral organoids recapitulate gene expression programs of fetal neocortex development 31 . The data are pre-processed RNA-seq, thus continuous data, with 729 samples and 58, 037 features. We selected the first feature as the target variable and all the rest were considered to be the features. In this case we used FBED and gOMP, employing the Pearson correlation coefficient because all measurements are continuous. gOMP on the other hand was more parsimonious, selecting only 8 features. At this point we must highlight the fact that the selection of a feature was based on the adjusted R 2 value. If the increase in the adjusted R 2 due to the candidate feature was more than 0.01 or (1/%), the feature was selected. 
The final example is on discrete valued target variable (count data) for which Poisson and quasi-Poisson regression models will be employed by the gOMP algorithm. The dataset with GEO accession number GSE47774 32 contains RNA-seq data with 256 samples and 43,919 features. We selected the first feature to be the target variable and all the rest are the features.
We ran gOMP using Poisson (test="testIndPois") and quasi Poisson (test="testIndQPois") regression models, but we changed the stopping value to tol=12. Due to over-dispersion (variance > mean), quasi Poisson is more appropriate r than Poisson regression that assumes that the mean and the variance are equal. When Poisson was used, 107 features were selected; since the wrong model was used, many false positive features were included, while with the quasi Poisson regression only 10 features were selected. r Negative binomial regression, test="testIndNB" is another alternative option. More recently 34 , applied MMPC in order to identify the features that provide novel information about steady-state plasma glucose (SSPG, a measure of peripheral insulin resistance) and are thus most useful for prediction 35 . used gOMP and identified the viscoelastic properties of the arterial tree as an important contributor to the circulating bubble production after a dive. Finally 36 , applied SES and gOMP were applied in the field of fisheries for identifying the genetic SNP loci that are associated with certain phenotypes of the gilthead seabream (Sparus aurata). Measurements from multiple cultured seabream families were taken, and since the data were correlated and GLMM was applied. The study led to a catalogue of genetic markers that set the ground for understanding growth and other traits of interest in Gilthead seabream, in order to maximize the aquaculture yield.
We presented the R package MXM and some of its feature selection algorithms. We discussed its advantages and disadvantages and compared it, at a high level, with other competing R packages. We then demonstrated, using real high-dimensional data with a diversity of types of target variables, four FS algorithms, including different regression models in some cases.
The package is constantly being updated with new functions and improvements being added and algorithms being transferred to C++ to decrease the computational cost. Computational efficiency was mentioned as one of MXM' disadvantage which we are trying to address. However, computational efficiency is one aspect, and flexibility another. Towards flexibility we plan to add of more regression models, more functionalities, options and graphical visualizations.
• The first dataset we used (survival target variable) is available from Computational Cancer Biology.
• The second dataset we used (unmatched case control target variable) is available from GEO.
• The third dataset we used (longitudinal data) is available from GEO.
• The fourth dataset we used (continuous target variable) is available from GEO.
• The fifth dataset we used (count data) is available from GEO.
MXM is available from: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/MXM/index.html.
Source code is available from: https://github.com/mensxmachina/MXM-R-Package
Archived source code at time of publication: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3458013 37
License: GPL-2.
expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard. 
Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA The manuscript introduces a new R package, MXM, that offers a variety of feature selection algorithms in regression models. The new package presents relevant contribution to the toolbox of feature selection algorithms by covering more types of target variables than most existing packages, accommodating data with small or big sample sizes, and providing additional functionalities and utility features. The manuscript also demonstrates the usage of several functions in the package by analyzing real data.
Regarding the presentation of the manuscript, I share the same concern with reviewer Thodoris that the acronyms in the paper come with poor explanation. Although several of the acronyms are explained in Table 4 and Table 6 , most of appearances of these acronyms have no reference to these tables or explanations. This makes the paper unnecessarily hard to read.
Secondly, I think the demonstration of the usage of the package could be more informative with more interpretations. For example, how can we interpret the p-values, adjusted R-squares, and deviance in the results of the model fittings? High level descriptions of the algorithms behind the demonstrated functions could also help the reader better understand the results.
Below are comments to specific places in the manuscript:
The 3rd paragraph in Introduction mentions that statistical tests (likelihood ratio, Wald, permutation based) can be plugged into the feature selection algorithms that work with small sample sized data. The second last paragraph on Page 6 is a bit confusing to me. The paragraph starts with pointing out computational efficiency as a disadvantage of MXM. However, this is followed by explaining why gOMP is efficient, and pointing out that SES and MMPC scales better and run faster than LASSO package. These seem like advantages in computational efficiency. In Paragraph 2 of "FS-related functions" section: for MMPC and SES, storing the results from one run and passing it to subsequent runs can lead to significant computational savings. Are there savings because the trained models serve as good starting points in the subsequent runs? On Page 9 in the output of MXM::fbed.reg, there are p-values associated with each selected variable. How can we interpret these p-values? It seems that these p-values are not adjusted for the extra degrees of freedom from feature selection. Below are some minor suggestions/typo fixes:
In Abstract -"The R package MXM is such an example, which offers ...": It's unclear to me what "such an example" refers to. It's clearer to state "The R package MXM offers ..." directly. Second paragraph in Introduction: "For example, packages that accept few or specific types of target variables." → "For example, some packages accept few or specific types of target variables." (make it a complete sentence.)
In "MXM versus other R packages" section: "... can treat at least one type of target variable, ..." → "... can treat at least k types of target variables, for k = 1, 2, ..., 8, ..." In the last paragraph on Page 5, does "BN" refer to Bayesian network (which also appears in the same paragraph)? In Paragraph 5 on Page 6 -"... making it one one of the few FS algorithms ...": remove the extra "one". In Paragraph 6 on Page6 -"MXM is using an efficient memory handling R package.": please cite the package. Last Paragraph on Page 7: "generalised" → "generalized" to be consistent with other places in the paper. First paragraph in Section "Use cases": the argument "test" refers to the type of regression model to be used. Why not name the argument something like "model type"? Some of the citations are not easily distinguishable from footnotes. e.g., citation 21 for Rfast on Page 8 and footnote 7 are both superscripts. Paragraph 2 on Page 11: "gOMP on the other has ..." → "gOMP on the other hand ...". First paragraph on Page 12 -"YouTube video streaming applications applications": duplicate "applications".


Is sufficient information provided to allow interpretation of the expected output datasets and any results generated using the tool?
Are the conclusions about the tool and its performance adequately supported by the findings presented in the article? Yes
No competing interests were disclosed.
Reviewer Expertise: statistical machine learning, feature selection, high dimensional data, graphical models, time series analysis, clinical trial design I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard, however I have significant reservations, as outlined above.
Author Response 12 Jul 2019 , University of Crete, Greece
We are grateful to the reviewers for their on-the-spot comments which we have addressed.
The manuscript introduces a new R package, MXM, that offers a variety of feature selection algorithms in regression models. The new package presents relevant contribution to the toolbox of feature selection algorithms by covering more types of target variables than most existing packages, accommodating data with small or big sample sizes, and providing additional functionalities and utility features. The manuscript also demonstrates the usage of several functions in the package by analyzing real data.
Comment: Regarding the presentation of the manuscript, I share the same concern with reviewer Thodoris that the acronyms in the paper come with poor explanation. Although several of the acronyms are explained in Table 4 and Table 6 , most of appearances of these acronyms have no reference to these tables or explanations. This makes the paper unnecessarily hard to read. Reply: We have added the interpretation of the acronyms when they first appear, at various places within the text. Comment: Secondly, I think the demonstration of the usage of the package could be more informative with more interpretations. For example, how can we interpret the p-values, adjusted R-squares, and deviance in the results of the model fittings? High level descriptions of the algorithms behind the demonstrated functions could also help the reader better understand the results. Reply: We thank the reviewer for this comment. We have added a small description of each algorithm does in Section "The MXM's FS algorithms and comparison with other FS algorithms". This was also highlighted by Prof Kypraios. Also, in Section "Advantages and disadvantages of MXM's FS algorithms" we have added a small paragraph regarding the p-values produced by the algorithms. Below are comments to specific places in the manuscript:
Comment: The 3rd paragraph in Introduction mentions that statistical tests(likelihood ratio, Wald, permutation based) can be plugged into the feature selection algorithms that work with small sample sized data. The aforementioned tests traditionally rely on large sample theory. I wonder what adjustments are needed to accommodate small sample sizes?
Reply: We have added a foot note in page 5 regarding this. There as on we added this I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard, however I have significant reservations, as outlined above.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune inflammatory response in the synovial tissue of joints, which affects ~1% of population worldwide (1) . However, the exact cause remains unclear (2) . ra is characterized by a progressive erosion of the articular cartilage and chronic inflammation of the synovial joint (3) . it has been reported that oxidative stress, inflammation and lipid peroxidation may affect the progression of ra (4) . ra, which is also a common cause of permanent disability, leads to increased medical cost, use of social services and a reduction in the quality of life of patients (5) , as the disease may lead to joint stiffness, swelling, pain and muscle wasting. a previous study indicated that muscle wasting was an important cause of ra-associated morbidity and mortality (6) . However, the genes regulating the proliferation of skeletal muscle in ra require additional study.
Micrornas (mirnas/mirs), are a type of non-coding rna (21-24 nucleotides in length) that post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression (7) . aberrant expression of mirnas has been demonstrated to be involved in several diseases, including various types of cancer, and rheumatic and other autoimmune diseases (8) (9) (10) . Previous studies have reported that imbalances in mir-146a, mir-155, mir-223 and mir-16 levels existed in the immune cells of patients with ra (11) (12) (13) (14) . lai et al found that decreased expression of mir-760 was affected by tumor necrosis factor-a in patients with ra (7) . in addition, it has been reported that mir-760 regulated the proliferation and apoptosis of a variety of cells, such as human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells, and human colon cancer and ovarian cancer cells, by targeting specific genes (15) (16) (17) . However, there are few studies regarding the regulatory mechanisms via which mir-760 affects skeletal miR-760 regulates skeletal muscle proliferation in rheumatoid arthritis by targeting Myo18b muscle proliferation in patients with ra, to the best of our knowledge. Skeletal muscles are primarily composed of different types of fibers (18) . Myoblasts are precursor cells, which are hypothesized to serve an important role in injured skeletal muscle (19) . Satellite cells mobilize and proliferate as myoblasts when the muscle needs to be repaired and/or remodeled (20) . Myosin-18b (Myo18b) is a myosin protein associated with human tumor progression, and loss-of-function mutations of Myo18b have been found in certain patients with nemaline myopathy (21) . notably, according to Berger et al (22) , a number of myopathies are associated with molecular defects in sarcomeres, and a complete loss of Myo18b function leads to a complete lack of sarcomeric structure, suggesting that Myo18b may serve an important role in sarcomere assembly. in the present study, it was demonstrated that certain mirnas were differentially expressed in the tarsus joint of a collagen-induced ra mouse model using the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database.
Based on these previous results, factors affecting the proliferation of myoblasts were assessed. Mueller et al (23) hypothesized that chronic systemic inflammation may negatively affect myonuclei number and the regenerative potential of satellite cells; however, this hypothesis has not been confirmed. Therefore, additional factors may affect proliferation, differentiation and thus, muscle strength. in the present study, the targeting effects of mir-760 on Myo18b were determined, and it was hypothesized that mir-760 regulated skeletal muscle proliferation in ra by targeting Myo18b.
Identification of differentially expressed genes. GEO2R (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/geo2r/) was used on the GEO dataset (24,25), GSE61140 (26) , to obtain the gene expression profile in the tarsus joint of a collagen-induced RA mouse model. Cell culture. Mouse c2c12 myoblasts were obtained from the american Type culture collection and cultured in DMEM (Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) containing 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) and 10% FBS (Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) in an incubator with 5% co 2 at 37˚C. The cells were passaged using 0.25% trypsin (Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) when the confluence reached 50%. Subsequently, the cells were moved to a differentiation medium containing dMeM with 2% horse serum (Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin when the cells reached 75-80% confluence, and then myogenic differentiation was induced via the addition of differentiation medium. The media was replaced every 24 h.
Cell transfection. a total of 1x10 5 c2c12 myoblasts were cultured in 6-well plates, and divided into 4 groups. The first group consisted of: control cells, untreated cells; negative control (nc) cells, cells transfected with nc sirna (sense, CAU GUG GUC UGU CGC AUA AUA and antisense, CGG UAC ACC AGA CAG CGU AUU); and small interfering (si)Myo18b cells, cells transfected with siMyo18b (sense, 5'-GAG CCA AAG AAC AAA UAA AUU-3' and antisense, 3'-UUC UCG GUU UCU UGU UUA UUU-5'). The second group consisted of: control cells; mock cells, cells transfected with pcdna3.1 (+) (GenomeDitech Co., Ltd.) only; and Myo18b cells, cells transfected with Myo18b-pcDNA3.1 (+) (GenomeDitech Co., Ltd.). The third group consisted of: nc cells; siMyo18b cells; mock cells and Myo18b cells. The fourth group consisted: Mimics control cells, cells transfected with mimics control (forward, 5'-UUC UCC GAA CGU GUC ACG UTT-3' and reverse, 5'-ACG UGA CAC GUU CGG AGA ATT-3'); miR-760 mimics cells, cells transfected with miR-760 mimics (forward, 5'-CGG CUC UGG GUC UGU GGG GA-3' and reverse, 5'-UCC CAC AGA CCC AGA GCCG-3'); inhibitors control cells, cells transfected with inhibitors control (5'-CAG UAC UUU UGU GUA GUA caa-3'); mir-760 inhibitors cells, cells transfected with miR-760 inhibitors (5'-TCC CCA CAG ACC CAG AGC CG). The siMyo18b, nc sirna, mir-760 mimics, mir-760 inhibitors, mimic control and inhibitor control were purchased from Shanghai GenePharma Co., Ltd.; transfection with siRNAs (50 nM), mimics (50 nM) and inhibitors (50 nM) transfection was performed using lipofectamine ® 2000 kit (invitrogen; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). The transfected cells were cultured in DMEM at 37˚C with 5% CO 2 for another 48 h prior to subsequent experiments.
rT-qPcr analysis was performed to determine the expression levels of Myo18b, mir-760, cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (cdK2), cyclin d1, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, MMP-9, myogenin (MyOG) and myosin heavy chain IId/x (MyH6) in c2c12 myoblasts. To determine the expression of Myo18b during the myogenic differentiation of c2c12 myoblasts, cells were harvested after 0, 1, 3, 5 or 7 days. relative expression levels of Myo18b, mir-760, cdK2, cyclin d1, MMP-2, MMP-9, MyOG and MyH6 in the C2C12 myoblasts were detected after 48 h of transfection with control, nc, siMyo18b, mock, Myo18b, mimics control, mir-760 mimics, inhibitor control and mir-760 inhibitor. Total rna was extracted from c2c12 myoblasts using Trizol ® reagent (invitrogen; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). The RNAs were reverse transcribed to cdnas using 1 µg rna and a High capacity cdna reverse Transcription kit (applied Biosystems; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.), the reverse transcription reaction conditions were set to 37˚C for 30 min, and reverse transcriptase inactivation was conducted at 85˚C for 5 min. Subsequently, the cdna products were used for qPcr using a light cycler 480 RT-PCR (Roche Diagnostics) and SYBR Green Master mix (Roche Diagnostics) in a final volume of 20 µl/well. The thermocycling conditions for miR-760 were: 95˚C for 15 min, followed by 40 cycles of 94˚C for 15 sec, 55˚C for 30 sec and 70˚C for 30 sec. Relative expression of miR-760 was normalized to U6 expression levels. SYBR Green on the 7500 qPCR system (Applied Biosystems; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) was used to determine the relative expression levels of Myo18b, CDK2, cyclin D1, MMP-2, MMP-9, MyOG and MyH6. The thermocycling conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 94˚C for 5 min, followed by 40 cycles of 94˚C for 30 sec, 60˚C for 30 sec and 72˚C for 30 sec. GAPDH was used as an internal reference gene, and relative expression was calculated using the 2 -ΔΔcq method (27) . The sequences of the primers used are listed in Table i .
Western blot analysis. Following transfection, western blotting was used to determine the protein expression levels of Myo18b, MyOG and MyH6 in C2C12 myoblasts in the control, NC, siMyo18b, mock, Myo18b, mimics control, mir-760 mimics, inhibitor control and mir-760 inhibitor groups. PBS was used to wash c2c12 myoblasts twice. Total proteins were extracted from c2c12 myoblasts using a protein lysis buffer (pH 7.4, 150 mmol/l NaCl, 20 mmol/l Tris, 1 mmol/l EGTA, 1 mmol/l edTa, 1 mmol/l β-glycerolphosphate, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mmol/l sodium pyrophosphate, 1 µg/ml leupeptin, 1 mmol/l na 3 Vo 4 and 1 mmol/l phenylmethyanesulfonyl fluoride). Following lysis, the lysates were incubated on ice for 30 min. The supernatant was collected by centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 30 min at 4˚C. A bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology co., ltd.) was used to measure the protein concentration. equivalent quantities of proteins (30 µg) were resolved on a 12% gel using SdS-capillary gel electrophoresis and transferred onto PVdF membranes (Bio-rad laboratories, inc.), which were probed with the following primary antibodies after blocking in 5% non-fat milk at room temperature for 2 h: Myo18b (cat. no. 36810002; 1:1,000; novus Biologicals, LLC); GAPDH (cat. no. ab181602; 1:10,000; Abcam); MyOG (cat. no. ab77232; 1:1,000; abcam); or MyH6 (cat. no. ab185967; 1:1,000; abcam). Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4˚C, and subsequently with the goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (HRP) secondary antibody (cat. no. ab205718; 1:3,000; abcam) at room temperature for 2 h. an enhanced chemiluminescence kit (Pierce; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) was used to visualize the signal, and Quantity one software (version 4.62; Bio-rad laboratories) was used to perform densitometry analysis.
Cell proliferation assay. cells were transfected as aforementioned. The c2c12 myoblasts were divided into 4 groups as follows: nc group, siMyo18b group, mock group and Myo18b group. To determine proliferation, 2x10 3 c2c12 myoblasts were seeded into 96-well plates and cultured in dMeM with 5% co 2 at 37˚C. Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8; Beyotime institute of Biotechnology) reagent (10 µl/well) was added at 24 and 48 h, and the cells were further incubated for 3 h at 37˚C. Subsequently, the absorbance at 450 nm was detected using a plate reader (Thermo labSystems; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.).
Cell cycle assay. in the cell cycle assay, cells were collected and fixed in 70% ethanol overnight at 4˚C. Subsequently, the cells were stained in PBS containing propidium iodide and RNase for 30 min at 4˚C in the dark. Cell cycle distribution was determined using a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) with CellQuest software (version 5.1; Bd Biosciences).
Wound-healing assay. Following transfection, cells were seeded in a 6-well plate with complete medium (dMeM with 10% FBS). Then, cells were starved in serum-free complete medium for 6-8 h, and a 200 µl pipette tip was used to create a straight wound in the cell monolayers when the cells had reached ~100% confluence. The cells were washed once with PBS. The scratch was observed and imaged under a fluorescence microscope (magnification, x100) at 0 and 24 h, and the wound width was measured. all experiments were performed in triplicate.
Dual-luciferase reporter assay. The putative binding sites of mir-760 in the Myo18b-3'-untranslated region (3'-uTr) were analyzed using TargetScan 7.2 ((http://www.targetscan. org/vert_72/). The site of interaction between mir-760 and target gene Myo18b-3'-UTR was verified using a dual-luciferase reporter assay. after amplifying and purifying Myo18b-3'-uTr and Myo18b-3'-uTr mutant (mut), both Pcr products were cloned into the pGL3 vector (Promega Corporation) to generate Myo18b-3'-uTr plamids and Myo18b-3'-uTr mut plamids. The c2c12 myoblasts (2x10 3 cells/ml) were co-transfected with Myo18b-3'-uTr/Myo18b-3'-uTr mut (0.5 µg) and mir-760 mimics/control (50 nM) using lipofectamine 2000, according to the manufacturer's protocol. relative luciferase activity was measured using a dual-luciferase reporter assay kit (Promega corporation) 48 h of transfection on a 
Myo18b expression is downregulated in the tarsus joint of collagen-induced RA. The gene expression profile in the tarsal joint of a mouse model of RA was first determined, and the data suggested that expression of Myo18b was lower in the tarsus joint of mice with collagen-induced ra, compared with non-induced controls (Fig. 1a ).
To determine the expression of Myo18b during the myogenic differentiation of c2c12 myoblasts, cells were harvested and the expression levels of Myo18b were determined in cells after 0, 1, 3, 5 and 7 days. The rT-qPcr analysis showed that the expression levels of Myo18b increased significantly on days 1, 3, 5 and 7 compared with 0 days (P<0.01), and Myo18b level decreased significantly on day 7 compared with 5 days (P<0.01; Fig. 1B) . additionally, the expression of Myo18b on day 7 was significantly upregulated compared with day 0 (P<0.01; Fig. 1B ).
Myo18b regulates proliferation and cell cycle progression in C2C12 myoblasts. The efficiency of siMyo18b and Myo18b transfection was determined using rT-qPcr and western blot analyses. The results showed that the expression of Myo18b in the cells transfected with siMyo18b was significantly decreased compared with the control or nc groups (P<0.01; Fig. 1c and d) . However, Myo18b expression in the Myo18b group was significantly increased compared with the control or mock groups (P<0.01; Fig. 1e and F) . Subsequently, the effects of Myo18b on the growth of c2c12 myoblasts were assessed. The ccK-8 assay results showed that the cell viability in the siMyo18b group was significantly reduced compared with the nc group at 24 (P<0.05) and 48 h (P<0.01) after transfection with siMyo18b, whereas the cell viability in the Myo18b group was significantly increased compared with the mock group at 24 (P<0.05) and 48 h (P<0.01) after transfection with Myo18b ( Fig. 2A) . Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis showed that the number of c2c12 myoblasts in the G1 phase was significantly increased in the siMyo18b group (P<0.01), and the number of cells in G2 and S phase were significantly decreased (P<0.01) compared with the NC group ( Fig. 2B and C) . The number of C2C12 myoblasts in the G1 phase were significantly decreased when cells were transfected with Myo18b (P<0.05), whereas the number of cells in the S phase were significantly increased (P<0.01), compared with the mock group (Fig. 2B and c) . rT-qPcr analysis showed that the expression levels of cdK2 and cyclin d1 in c2c12 myoblasts transfected with siMyo18b were significantly decreased (P<0.05), and the expression levels in c2c12 myoblasts transfected with Myo18b were significantly increased (P<0.01; Fig. 2d ), compared with the respective controls.
Myo18b regulates the migration of C2C12 myoblasts. The results of the wound-healing assay showed that the migratory rate of c2c12 myoblasts transfected with siMyo18b was significantly decreased compared with the NC group (P<0.01). The migratory rate of c2c12 myoblasts transfected with Myo18b was significantly increased compared with the mock cells (P<0.01; Fig. 3 ).
Myo18b regulates differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts. The results of rT-qPcr and western blotting analysis results showed that siMyo18b downregulated the mrna expression levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9, whereas Myo18b overexpression increased the expression of these genes in c2c12 myoblasts (Fig. 4a ). Furthermore, the mrna and protein expression levels of MyOG and MyH6 were downregulated in the siMyo18b group compared with the nc group, and increased in cells overexpressing Myo18b compared with the mock group (P<0.01; Fig. 4B-d) . These results suggested that siMyo18b decreased differentiation in c2c12 myoblasts and Myo18b overexpression induced opposing effects.
Myo18b is a target gene of miR-760 in C2C12 myoblast. a binding site between mir-760 and Myo18b-3'-uTr was identified using TargetScan (Fig. 5a ). a dual-luciferase reporter assay revealed that miR-760 mimics significantly decreased the luciferase activity when the reporter gene contained the Myo18b-3'-uTr in c2c12 myoblasts (P<0.01). However, no decrease in luciferase activity was observed when the reporter gene contained the Myo18b-3'-uTr mut (P>0.05; Fig. 5B ).
The expression levels of mir-760 in c2c12 myoblasts were determined using rT-qPcr analysis following transfection. The results showed that the expression of mir-760 in c2c12 myoblasts was significantly increased in cells transfected with miR-760 mimics compared with cells transfected with the control mimics (P<0.01). after transfection with mir-760 inhibitor, the mir-760 expression level was decreased, compared with cells in the inhibitor control group (P<0.01; Fig. 5c ).
A CCK-8 assay showed there were no significant differences observed in terms of the cell viability at 24 h among the groups (P>0.05), and that the cell viability at 48 h was decreased significantly in the cells transfected with miR-760 mimics, compared with the mimics control group (P<0.05) after 48 h. Cell viability at 48 h was increased significantly in the cells transfected with mir-760 inhibitor compared with the inhibitors control group (P<0.05; Fig. 5d ). Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis showed that the percentage of c2c12 myoblasts transfected with mir-760 mimics in G1 was significantly increased (P<0.01), whereas the percentages of cells in G2 and S were significantly decreased (P<0.01) compared with the mimics control group (Fig. 6a and B) . The percentage of cells transfected with miR-760 inhibitors in G1 were decreased (P<0.05), and the percentage of cells in S phase were significantly increased (P<0.01) compared with the inhibitors control group (Fig. 6a and B) . rT-qPcr analysis revealed that the mRNA expression levels of cyclin D1 were significantly decreased in the mir-760 mimics group compared with the mimics control group (P<0.01), while the cdK2 level was slightly reduced but not significant. The expression levels of cdK2 and cyclin d1 in mir-760 inhibitor group were significantly higher compared with the mimics control group (P<0.01; Fig. 6c ). miR-760 decreases the migration of C2C12 myoblasts. a wound healing assay was used to determine the effects of mir-760 on the migratory capacity of c2c12 myoblasts following transfection with a mir-760 mimic or inhibitor. The results showed that the migratory abilities of c2c12 myoblasts transfected with miR-760 mimics for 24 h were significantly reduced compared with the mimics control group (P<0.01). The migratory capacity in cells transfected with mir-760 inhibitors at 24 h was significantly increased compared with the inhibitors control group (P<0.01; Fig. 7 ).
rT-qPcr and western blot analyses showed that the expression levels of MMP-2, MMP-9, Myo18b, MyOG and MyH6 in c2c12 myoblasts transfected with mir-760 mimics were significantly decreased compared with the mimics control group (P<0.01; Fig. 8a and B) . The expression levels of these genes were significantly increased in cells transfected with mir-760 inhibitor, compared with the inhibitor control group (P<0.01; Fig. 8c and d) .
ra is a chronic autoimmune disease that causes progressive articular destruction, functional loss of joints and related comorbidities of bone, vasculature and metabolism, and thus physiologically affects patients (28) . ra results from complex interactions between genes and the environment (29) . Studies have shown that reducing inflammation, inhibiting angiogenesis and inducing apoptosis of fibroblast-like synoviocytes may effectively improve ra (30) (31) (32) . Skeletal muscle atrophy has been observed in patients with ra, and Myo18b is an important component involved in the rapid formation of skeletal muscle (33, 34) . mirnas have been reported as important regulators of skeletal muscle development and differentiation (35) . Previously, expression of mir-760 was demonstrated to be altered in several diseases (36, 37) . However, the role of mir-760 in regulating the proliferation of ra skeletal muscle remains unclear. The aims of the present study were to examine the regulatory effects of mir-760 during skeletal muscle proliferation in ra, and to determine the underlying mechanism.
ra is associated with muscle wasting, which impedes prognosis. Therefore, promoting skeletal muscle proliferation has significant clinical value for patients with RA (38, 39) . certain genes and multiple proteolytic systems are involved in muscle atrophy (40) . Furthermore, the release of cytokines during chronic inflammation may promote satellite cell activation and myogenesis that help promote skeletal muscle proliferation (41) . according to Malfatti et al (42) , Myo18b encodes an unconventional myosin protein which is primarily expressed in skeletal and cardiac muscles that are associated with nemaline myopathy and cardiomyopathy. Similarly, alazami et al (43) showed that a rare syndrome, presenting Klippel-Feil anomaly and myopathy, may have been caused by a mutation in Myo18b. in the present study, it was demonstrated that Myo18b was downregulated in the tarsus joint of ra; thus, it was suggested that mir-760 may have regulated skeletal muscle proliferation in RA by targeting Myo18b. To confirm a link between mir-760 and Myo18b, a dual-luciferase reporter assay was performed, and the results showed that Myo18b was a direct target gene of mir-760.
Myoblast fusion is a crucial step in skeletal muscle differentiation, and the regulation of genes such as cyclin d1 and MyOG may affect the proliferation and differentiation of myoblasts (44, 45) . cdKs are proline-directed serine/threonine-protein kinases, which are primarily involved in cell cycle regulation, and intracellular and extracellular signal fusion (46) . cdKs can bind to cyclins to form heterodimers and promote the progression of the cell cycle. as a type of protein kinase, cdK2 is involved in the regulation of the G1/S phases of the cell cycle in patients with ra (47) . in the present study, it was demonstrated that Myo18b expression was increased as c2c12 myoblasts differentiated at 1, 3 and 5 days, but decreased on day 7. Based on this result, it may be the case that the rate of apoptosis increases after day 5. in a previous study, mirnas were found to regulate cell proliferation, cell cycle progression and migration by altering the expressions of various factors, such as MalaT1 (48) . in the present study, the results showed that mir-760 overexpression and Myo18b silencing significantly decreased the expression levels of cdK2 and cyclin d1 in c2c12 myoblasts. additionally, it was demonstrated that mir-760 overexpression and Myo18b silencing decreased the proliferation and migration of c2c12 myoblasts. These results suggested that mir-760 may inhibit the proliferation and migration of c2c12 myoblasts by suppressing Myo18b and thus slowing down skeletal muscle formation. Furthermore, MMP-2 and MMP-9 are the primary MMPs responsible for the degradation of type iV collagen, primarily in the basement membrane close to the muscular layer (49, 50) . MMPs are associated with increased motility, differentiation and regeneration of skeletal muscle. Zhai et al found that salicin decreased the levels of inflammatory factors and inhibited the expression of MMP-1/-3 in interleukin-1β-induced RA-fibroblast-like synoviocytes, thereby improving ra (30) . Therefore, regulation of MMPs may prove to be an effective method of treating patients with ra.
Skeletal muscles are composed of heterogeneous types of fibers based on MyHC expression (51) . In patients with RA, varying degrees of muscle mass decline and reduction in cross-sectional area have been reported, and a slight but significant decrease in MyHc content has also been observed (52) . MyOG, a key transcription factor in myogenesis, plays an important role in the regulation of myoblast differentiation and is critical for the terminal differentiation of differentiated myoblasts (45) . in addition, a previous study suggested that upregulation of MyOG expression was required for myoblasts to fuse into new or existing myotubes, and that the knockdown of MTMr7 promoting c2c12 myoblast early differentiation was associated with the upregulation of MyOG (53) . In the present study, the results showed that mir-760 inhibited MMP-2, MMP-9, MyOG and MyH6 expression levels in c2c12 myoblasts by downregulating Myo18b. Based on these results, it was hypothesized that mir-760 may affect skeletal muscle proliferation and differentiation by regulating cell cycle and myocyte differentiation, and such a phenomenon may be associated with the regulation or the expression of Myo18b, MyOG and MyHC.
in conclusion, it was revealed that Myo18b was a target gene of mir-760. overexpression of mir-760 downregulated the expression levels of cdK2, cyclin d1, MMP-2, MMP-9, MyOG and MyH6. miR-760 decreased proliferation, cell cycle progression, migration and differentiation in c2c12 myoblasts by targeting Myo18b. The results of the present study may improve understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the proliferation of skeletal muscle in patients with ra. There are certain limitations to the present study. For example, all experiments were performed in vitro and thus, whether the results are replicated in vivo remains to be determined. additionally, mir-760 targets other genes involved in the proliferation and differentiation of c2c12 myoblasts; thus, the effects mir-760 on the various cellular behaviors may have been mediated via other proteins.
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a rare but often life-threatening syndrome of excessive immune activation. Primary HLH is triggered by genetic disorders and usually manifests in children below the age of 18 months. e term secondary (acquired) HLH has generally been used to describe cases in adults without known genetic predisposition and a clear trigger for HLH. is trigger is often an infection or an alteration in immune homeostasis (e.g., malignancy, rheumatologic conditions, or immunodeficiency syndromes) [1] . HLH may present as a single episode of disease or recurrent episodes. Histoplasmosis-associated HLH is a relatively rare disorder with limited data about treatment [2, 3] . We describe the clinical features, treatment, and outcomes of cases seen at the University of Kansas Medical Center (KUMC). In addition, we reviewed the current literature about diagnosis and treatment of histoplasmosis-associated HLH.
We searched our medical informatics HERON (Healthcare Enterprise Repository for Ontological Narration) database for the following ICD9/ICD10 terms: "hemophagocytic syndrome," "hemophagocytosis," "hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis" or "macrophage activation syndrome" and "histoplasmosis" or "disseminated histoplasmosis." We included patients older than 18 years and seen at our institution from 1/1/2006 to 9/30/2017. All patients who satisfied the HLH-04 criteria [4] for a diagnosis of HLH (i.e., 5 of 8 criteria) and confirmed to have histoplasmosis by retrospective chart review were included. HLH-04 criteria include (1) fever; (2) splenomegaly; (3) cytopenia in two or more cell lines; (4) hypertriglyceridemia (triglyceride level ≥265 mg/dL or hypofibrinogenemia (fibrinogen level ≤150 mg/ dL); [5] hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow, spleen, or lymph nodes; [6] hyperferritinemia (ferritin level ≥500 ng/mL); [7] impaired NK cell function; and [8] elevated soluble CD25 (soluble IL-2 receptor alpha) two standard deviations above ageadjusted laboratory-specific norms. is study was approved by the University of Kansas Medical Center institutional board review.
We searched PubMed for "histoplasmosis" and "hemophagocytic syndrome," "histoplasmosis" and "secondary hemophagocytic syndrome," "histoplasmosis induced hemophagocytic syndrome," "disseminated histoplasmosis" and "hemophagocytic syndrome," "HLH" and "histoplasmosis," and "histoplasma associated HLH." Few papers were only available by a Google search. We included all case reports/series with a published abstract in English.
We identified five cases of histoplasmosis-associated HLH.
e clinical characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . All patients had disseminated histoplasmosis and were immunosuppressed. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection was the underlying condition in 2/5 patients (40%); the diagnosis of HIV in both patients was new. e other three patients were on steroids in addition to other immunosuppressive agents. ere was a male predominance 4/5 (80%). All patients 5/5 (100%) had positive blood cultures for histoplasma, and the histoplasma antigen (blood or urine) was above the limit of quantification. Histoplasma was seen on bone marrow (BM) biopsy in 3/4 (75%) patients.
Four patients (80%) met at least 5 out of 8 criteria for the diagnosis of HLH as shown in Table 2 . e IL2-receptor, cytopenia, and ferritin criteria were met in all five patients. Peak ferritin level was above the limit of quantification in 4/5 (80%) patients. One patient met only four criteria, but the hematology consulting team felt that it was highly likely secondary HLH. e treatment and outcomes are shown in Table 3 . Most patients were started on liposomal amphotericin B for at least 2 weeks and then transitioned to an oral azole. One patient received only voriconazole. ree out of five patients survived to hospital discharge. e literature review yielded 60 cases from 39 papers; most of them were case reports and few were case series. Table 4 summarizes the patients baseline characteristics, treatment used, diagnostic tests for histoplasmosis, and outcomes. Five papers were published before 2000, and 18 papers were published since 2015. We report five patients at our institution from 1/1/2006 to 9/30/2017 ( Table 1 ). All 5 cases at KUMC were diagnosed after 2010. Adding our five cases to the 60 reported previously, the median age of cases was 41 years and 72% (37/52) were men. e most common underlying immunosuppressive condition was HIV in 62% (36/58). Six patients had solid organ transplant, and there was no clear underlying immunodeficiency described in seven patients. In eleven patients, there was no mention of the host immune status. e median CD4 count in HIV patients was 17 cells/μL. e majority of patients had disseminated histoplasmosis. Five patients were diagnosed by either lymph node biopsy or histoplasma urine Ag only and not proven to have disseminated histoplasmosis.
Initial antifungal treatment consisted of amphotericin B formulation in 48 cases and only azoles in four cases. e specific treatment for HLH was as follows: nine patients received steroids only, six patients received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) only, three patients received dexamethasone and etoposide, two patients received etoposide, dexamethasone, and cyclosporine, two patients received steroids and IVIG, and one patient received Anakinra and IVIG. e overall inpatient case fatality rate was 31% (20/64) and 37% (13/35) among HIV patients. e mortality rate 
Histoplasmosis-associated HLH is rare but likely underdiagnosed given the nonspecific clinical and laboratory presentation. e diagnosis is challenging because high fever, peripheral blood cytopenia, splenomegaly, and elevated ferritin are very common in patients with disseminated histoplasmosis. We report the second largest case series of histoplasmosis-induced HLH. About half of the cases (29/60) were reported after 2014, and all five cases at our institution were diagnosed after 2010. is may be explained by an increased awareness of this entity. Almost all cases of histoplasmosis-associated HLH occurred in patients with disseminated histoplasmosis. Most patients were relatively young. HIV and its numerous related opportunistic infections remain the most common underlying immunodeficiency that triggers HLH, but the recent literature showed an increasing number of non-HIV patients (organ transplant, patients receiving chemotherapy, or other immunosuppressive treatments). is is likely caused by the recent increase in disseminated histoplasmosis among non-HIV infected patients [43, 44] . Only few patients had no clear underlying immunodeficiency. e male predominance may be related in part to the higher incidence and prevalence of HIV in men in the United States.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) could trigger hemophagocytic syndrome by itself, or secondary to ART initiation or opportunistic infections [45] . In a retrospective study to evaluate the triggers of HLH among HIV patients in Brazil, opportunistic infections were the most common factors (59%) including Mycobacterium (34%), Cytomegalovirus (14%), and Cryptococcus neoformans (11%) [46] .
Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) is a form of HLH that is usually associated with rheumatologic diseases and inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). In a review of literature of 50 cases of HLH or MAS, the association between HLH and IBD was thought to be secondary to infections, the effect of immunosuppressive therapy, and the potential presence of a genetic susceptibility [47] . e majority of cases were Crohn's disease (CD) rather than ulcerative colitis; this was attributed to the more frequent use of immunomodulators in CD. e number of patients in each treatment group and the noncontrolled nature of this review hinder making conclusions about the most effective therapy. Patients who received amphotericin B had a slightly lower case fatality rate compared to the whole group. It is unclear if the addition of etoposide and steroids was helpful, but 4/5 patients with such regimen survived. We suggest starting a lipid formulation of amphotericin B as soon as possible, as recommended by the Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines [48] for the treatment of moderate to severe disseminated histoplasmosis. ere are limited data to establish the best treatment protocol and the role of immunosuppressive therapy and IVIG for histoplasma-associated HLH [1] . e treatment of secondary HLH is most effective when the inciting disease can be treated and controlled. If effective histoplasmosis treatment fails to demonstrate improvement after 48-72 hours, clinicians often consider initiation of Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases and Medical Microbiology [49] . Once clinical improvement is noted, we believe immunosuppressive therapy can be tapered, and the full protocol is often not required. We report a small number of cases at our institution and it is possible that we could have missed cases in our retrospective search. In published case reports and case series, some data were lacking and few articles were not in English.
Histoplasmosis-associated HLH among adults is an uncommon but serious disease with high mortality. e clinical and laboratory findings that should prompt evaluation for HLH are splenomegaly, highly elevated ferritin, and cytopenia in an immunocompromised patient with disseminated histoplasmosis. e delay in diagnosis of HLH may affect outcomes and patients with suspected HLH should have a prompt hematology consultation. HLH appears to be a disease of excessive immune activation, and the optimal treatment and duration of immunosuppressive therapy remains unknown. Early antifungal therapy with a lipid formulation amphotericin B is critical. Multicenter prospective studies are needed to help define the role and duration of immunosuppressive therapy for this disease.
e authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
A common finding in daily dental treatments is a tooth with a minimal coronal structure in need of a dental post for retention inside the canal, for better distribution of functional forces, and for the support of future prostheses [1-3]. Disadvantages of metal posts, such as root fracture, weak aesthetics, and corrosion, and advantages of fiber posts, such as having an elastic modulus similar to that of dentin [4] , reducing the rate of vertical root fractures [3,5,6] as a result of equal distribution of forces on the walls of the root canal [7], bonding to resin core materials, suitable aesthetics [6] , and the possibility of root retreatment because of their easy retrieval from the root canal, have increased the use of fiber posts [8] . The adhesion between the tooth structure and adhesive cements is the result of physical and chemical interactions at the dentin-cement interface [9] . Various chemical substances are used as irrigants for chemical-mechanical preparation of root canals, aiming at disinfection, dissolving of pulp tissues, and smear layer removal [9] . Sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) is a commonly used irrigant in root canal treatment due to its wide-spectrum antibacterial effect and its potential to dissolve necrotic tissue remnants [10] . In addition to its strong antibacterial effect which depends on the concentration of the available chlorine [10, 11] , sodium hypochlorite has the ability to remove organic contents, especially collagen. Sodium hypochlorite breaks down into sodium chloride (NaCl) and oxygen; the oxygen-rich layer is a strong inhibitor of the bond of resin cements to dentin [12, 13] . Oxygen bubbles on the surface of cement and dentin interfere with the penetration of resin cements into dentinal tubules [14] . Sodium hypochlorite is thought to cause the oxidation of a number of compounds in the dentin matrix, especially collagen [12, 15] . Radicals derived from dentinal proteins compete with vinyl free radicals produced by light activation of resins, leaving the end of the chain incomplete and the polymerization unfinished [13] , thus compromising the bond strength of the adhesive system [16] ; this also reduces the dentinal calcium and phosphate content [17] , weakens the mechanical properties of dentin, such as the elastic modulus, bending strength, and hardness [18] , and reduces the micro-mechanical interactions between adhesive resins and the root canal dentin after irrigation with sodium hypochlorite [19] . The search for a new irrigant has led to experimental studies on the use of calcium hypochlorite (Ca(OCl)2). Dutta and Saunders [20] have recently introduced calcium hypochlorite as a root canal irrigant. The effect of calcium hypochlorite, as a root canal irrigant, on the bond strength of fiber posts luted to radicular dentin with resin cements has not yet been investigated. Hence, the aim of the present study was to carry out a comparative investigation on the effects of calcium hypochlorite and sodium hypochlorite, as root canal irrigants, on the bond strength of posts cemented with a selfadhesive resin cement. The null hypothesis of this study was that 5.25% calcium hypochlorite irrigant could not have a significant effect on the push-out bond strength of fiber posts to dentin.
In this in-vitro experimental study, 40 singlecanal premolars, recently extracted for orthodontic or periodontal reasons, without any cracks, root caries or curved canals, were selected. The teeth had similar mesiodistal and buccolingual diameters [1]. Surface debris was removed using periodontal scalers and hand instruments. The teeth were kept in 0.2% thymol solution [21] at room temperature. The teeth were decoronated perpendicular to the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) using a diamond disc (Skillbond, Jota, UK) such that 14 mm of the coronoapical length remained. The specimens were randomly divided into five groups of eight samples each, and then, the canals were irrigated as follows: Group 1: 0.9% normal saline (control), Group 2: 2.5% sodium hypochlorite, Group 3: 5.25% sodium hypochlorite, Group 4: 2.5% calcium hypochlorite, and Group 5: 5% calcium hypochlorite. The root canal was cleaned using the conventional step-back technique with a #35 K-file (Mani Inc., Tochigi-Ken, Japan) until reaching the working length, and then, the canal was shaped using #2 and #3 Gates-Glidden drills (Mani Inc., Tochigi-Ken, Japan). One ml of each irrigant was used for each sample in the corresponding study group using a 21-gauge syringe (Shafa Pharmaceuticals, Tehran, Iran) between changing the files and with Gates-Glidden drills. The irrigants were freshly prepared for each application. Next, the root canals were irrigated with distilled water and were dried with absorbent paper points (AriaDent, Tehran, Iran). The root canals were obturated using the lateral condensation technique with guttapercha cones (AriaDent, Tehran, Iran) of the same size, ProTaper files (Dentsply/Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland), and a resin-based sealer (silver-free AH26, Dentsply DeTrey GmbH, Konstanz, Germany). Then, the coronal area was temporarily sealed with a composite resin (Denfil Flow, Vericom Co. Ltd., Gyeonggido, Korea). The specimens were incubated (Behdad Digital Incubator, Tehran, Iran) at 37°C with 100% humidity for a week so that the sealer could be set. Then, 10 mm of the gutta-percha was removed from the root canal using #2 and #3 Peeso reamers (Mani Co., Tochigi-ken, Japan), while 4 mm of the gutta-percha was left at the end of the root canal to maintain the apical seal. Post spaces were prepared in all specimens using a special drill for the posts (Series 911, Conical Type 2°, Micro.Medica s.r.l., Robbio, PV, Italy). In order to determine the effect of the irrigants, the post space was irrigated for 60 seconds with 5 ml of the irrigant corresponding to each group. Then, the teeth were irrigated with 5 ml of distilled water and were dried with absorbent paper points. Afterward, the posts (Micro.Medica s.r.l., Robbio, PV, Italy) were tested inside the canals to evaluate their fit, and they were cleaned with alcohol, dried, and cemented using BisCem self-adhesive cement (Bisco Inc., Schaumburg, IL, USA). The specifications of the materials used in the present study are listed in Table 1 . In order to cement the posts, the cement was placed inside the canal using special injection Table 1 : The specifications and the composition of the materials used in the present study points that slowly moved backward while the canal was filled. The post was kept inside the canal for 30 seconds to ensure its complete seating. Next, light-curing (Optilux 501, Kerr Demetron, Orange, CA, USA) was performed for 40 seconds. After cementing and coating the coronal surfaces of the teeth with a liquid composite (Denfil Flow, Vericom Laboratories Ltd., Anyang, Korea), the teeth were incubated at 37°C with 100% humidity for 24 hours. Then, they underwent 1,000 thermocycles at 5-55°C with a dwell time of 30 seconds and a transfer time of 10 seconds. All the prepared roots were mounted in acrylic resin (Acropars, Marlic Medical Industries Co., Tehran, Iran), and three 1.1-mm-thick slices were obtained from the middle part of the root (n=24 in each group). The sections were cut perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the root. No failure occurred during cutting, and all the pieces were selected for the push-out test. A pin with a diameter of 1 mm was used to exert the force on the posts. The pin was placed on the specimens such that it was completely in contact with the post during the test. The direction of force application was from the apical aspect toward the coronal aspect so that the post could move toward the larger zone. Then, a push-out test was carried out for each section at a crosshead speed of 0.5 mm/minute using a universal testing machine (Walter & Bai, K21046, Löhningen, Switzerland). The maximum force at the point where the post was dislodged from the root section was considered as the bond failure point and was recorded in Newton (N). Then, the push-out bond strengths were calculated in Megapascal (MPa) by dividing the force at the bond failure point by the area of the bonded cross-section according to the following formula [1]:
where "R" is the radius of the coronal third of the post, "r" represents the radius of the apical third of the post, and "h" shows the thickness of each specimen in millimeters (mm). The failure type in each cross-section was evaluated using a stereomicroscope (MBC-10, SF-100, Lomo, St. Petersburg, Russia) at ×40 magnification. The failure patterns were classified as adhesive failure between cement and post, adhesive failure between cement and dentin, and mixed failure pattern.
One sample from each group was prepared for bonding interface analysis under an SEM (JSM-5410LV; JEOL, Tokyo, Japan) at ×2000 and ×5000 magnifications.
The data were analyzed according to one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey's HSD (honestly significant difference) post-hoc test with the aid of SPSS 23 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA; α=0.05).
Values related to the mean and standard deviation (SD) of the bond strengths (MPa) are reported in Table 2 for all experimental groups. The lowest bond strength belonged to the control group, while the highest bond strength belonged to the 5% calcium hypochlorite group. There was a statistically significant difference between the 5% calcium hypochlorite group and the other groups (P<0.001); however, the difference between the other groups was not significant. The results of the SEM analysis showed the penetration of the cement into dentinal tubules and the presence of resin tags in the control group (Fig. 1) ; the length of the resin tags reached 30 to 50 micrometers (μm). In the 2.5% sodium hypochlorite group (Fig. 2) , the cement was separated from dentin, and no cement penetration was detected in dentinal tubules. Resin tags and the penetration of the cement into dentinal tubules can be seen in the SEM images of the 5.25% sodium hypochlorite group (Fig. 3) ; the length of the resin tags reached 30 to 60 μm. Resin tags and the penetration of the cement into dentinal tubules can also be seen in the SEM images of the 2.5% calcium hypochlorite group (Fig. 4) ; the length of the resin tags reached 40 to 90 μm. Figure 5 shows resin tags and the penetration of the cement into dentinal tubules in the 5% calcium hypochlorite group; the length of the resin tags reached 60 to 100 μm. The failure pattern frequency in each group is reported in Table 3 . In group 1, adhesive failure at the postluting agent interface was reported as the most frequent type of failure. In group 2, no adhesive failure at the dentine-luting agent interface was reported.
A scanning electron microscopic image of a specimen in the 2.5% sodium hypochlorite group Fig. 3 . A scanning electron microscopic image of a specimen in the 5.25% sodium hypochlorite group.
A scanning electron microscopic image of a specimen in the 2.5% calcium hypochlorite group.
A scanning electron microscopic image of a specimen in the 5% calcium hypochlorite group. c=cement, d=root canal dentin, r=resin tag) In groups 3, 4, and 5, mixed failure pattern was reported as the most frequent type of failure.
In the present study, we carried out a comparative investigation on the effects of calcium hypochlorite and sodium hypochlorite, as root canal irrigants, on the bond strength of posts luted with a selfadhesive resin cement. When analyzing the obtained results, the null hypothesis of this study was rejected as the 5.25% calcium hypochlorite irrigant had a significant effect on the increase in the push-out bond strength. Chemical solutions used for disinfection, cleaning, and completing the mechanical process of instrumentation during root canal treatment cause physical and chemical changes, such as decreased microhardness and increased permeability of the root canal dentin [22, 23] . The severity of the effects of these solutions is directly correlated with the concentration of their compounds and changes in the dentin layer [24] . Due to its antibacterial properties and tissue solving ability, sodium hypochlorite is used as a common irrigant in root treatment [25] . Use of this substance at 5% concentration reduces the dentinal calcium and phosphate content [17] and weakens the mechanical properties of dentin, such as the elastic modulus, bending strength, and hardness [18] . According to some studies, this solution reduces the bond strength of the post to radicular dentin [26, 27] , whereas some other studies have shown no decrease in bond strength after using this solution [28, 29] . In the present study, no decrease was observed in bond strength after using sodium hypochlorite. This non-decrease in bond strength can be due to the final irrigation of root canal and post space with distilled water. In the present study, a self-adhesive cement was used to cement the post to radicular dentin. According to some researchers, selfadhesive resin cements do not have enough etching potential to remove the smear layer inside the root canal after preparation of the post space [29, 30] , while some other studies have reported better results about selfadhesive cements in this respect [3, 31, 32] . Nonetheless, it should be noted that these studies lacked a thermocycling/aging procedure and could not simulate the clinical conditions. The bonding mechanism of selfadhesive cements is based on micromechanical retention and chemical bonding. BisCem cement contains acidic phosphate monomers which establish chemical bonds to calcium hydroxyapatite [12, 14] . In the present study, the bond strength in the control group was not significantly different than that in the 2.5% sodium hypochlorite, 5% sodium hypochlorite, and 2.5% calcium hypochlorite groups. Likewise, there was no significant difference between the 2.5% sodium hypochlorite and 5.25% sodium hypochlorite groups. It has been stated that the use of calcium hypochlorite solution on dentin increases the amount of calcium while decreasing the amount of carbon [33] . This finding suggests that the use of a calcium hypochlorite solution can result in changes in the chemical composition of the dentin surface by removing organic materials. In addition, the amount of calcium and phosphorus ions increases, which can be beneficial for mineralization process and formation of amorphous calcium phosphate phase in the hybrid layer; calcium and phosphorus ions are the mineral components of the primary dentin. New apatite crystals and calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate crystals may also form. These crystals may be attached to the surface through ionic bonds or may be surrounded by the adhesive [33] . According to the present study, the use of calcium hypochlorite, as a root canal irrigant, increases the bond strength of calcium groups. Because of the presence of calcium sediments in the environment and their probable entrance into the radicular dentin structure, and since the self-adhesive cement increases the bond strength through chemical bonding to these substances, BisCem self-adhesive cement resulted in the increased bond strength with chemical bonding to calcium hydroxyapatite, calcium phosphate crystals, and apatite crystals ;however, this increase was not significant. This can be due to root canal irrigation after cleaning and shaping as well as post space irrigation with distilled water, which removes calcium sediments inside dentinal tubules resulting from the irrigant. Since this substance has been used at a low concentration, the volume of its sediments has been reduced by irrigation with distilled water; therefore, it was not able to significantly increase the bond strength. This difference may also become significant in case of an increase in the number of specimens and a change in the status and the concentration of the substance. Nonetheless, the 2.5% calcium hypochlorite group was significantly different than the 5% calcium hypochlorite group in this respect. In this study, the 5% calcium hypochlorite group showed the highest bond strength (11.84±2.04 MPa), which was significantly different than that of the rest of the groups. This may be due to the chemical bonding of BisCem cement to newly-formed apatite crystals or calcium phosphate crystals. Since the concentration of the calcium hypochlorite solution was appropriate and it was not removed by irrigation, the formation of apatite crystals or calcium phosphate crystals increased, resulting in a dramatic increase in bond strength. When analyzing the results of the present study, in the 2.5% sodium hypochlorite group, the lowest failure rate belonged to the failure at the adhesive cement-dentin interface, which was consistent with some similar studies [34, 35] while contrasting some other studies [36, 37] .
In the 5.25% sodium hypochlorite group, the highest failure rate belonged to the mixed failure pattern, which was consistent with a study conducted by Bitter et al [28] . No failure at the adhesive cement-dentin interface was reported in the 2.5% calcium hypochlorite and 5% calcium hypochlorite groups, and most of the failures were mixed failures, which is consistent with the higher bond strengths in these two groups compared to the other groups. The lower rate of failure at the adhesive cement-dentin interface can be due to the absence of thermomechanical loading, which has been shown to effectively change the percentage of the predominant failure pattern before and after loading [38] . In addition, in the present study, a jig was designed for the push-out test such that its bar was only in contact with the post surface, while the cement-dentin interface was supported by a stainless steel table that had a hole with a diameter similar to that of the post. This causes a more favorable failure pattern at the interface area while performing the test and prevents excess pressure on dentin. An SEM evaluation was also carried out in the present study. The SEM images were consistent with the results obtained in the groups. Resin tags were obviously more frequent in group 5, where the bond strength increased dramatically. It has been shown recently that the thickness of the hybrid layer and the morphology of resin tags have only a small effect on the bond strength [39] . The decrease in the intraradicular dentin bond strength is probably due to factors other than substrate morphology and can be due to clinical problems resulting from limited endodontic space and high C-factor [39]. The limitations of this in-vitro study included the small sample size and the inability to thoroughly simulate the clinical conditions.
Considering the limitations of the present study, it seems that the use of calcium hypochlorite solutions at an appropriate concentration increases the bond strength of fiber posts cemented with self-adhesive resin cements.
In the title compound, C 18 H 13 ClFNO, the dihedral angle between the mean planes of the chloro-and fluoro-substituted benzene ring and the naphthalene ring system is 60.5 (8) . In the crystal, molecules are linked by N-HÁ Á ÁO hydrogen bonds, forming a zigzag chain along [101] .
For the structural similarity of N-substituted 2-arylacetamides to the lateral chain of natural benzylpenicillin, see: Mijin & Marinkovic (2006) ; Mijin et al. (2008) . For the coordination abilities of amides, see: Wu et al. (2008 Wu et al. ( , 2010 Table 1 Hydrogen-bond geometry (Å , ). 
A. S. Praveen, J. P. Jasinski, J. A. Golen, B. Narayana and H. S. Yathirajan Comment N-Substituted 2-arylacetamides are very interesting compounds because of their structural similarity to the lateral chain of natural benzylpenicillin (Mijin et al., 2006 (Mijin et al., , 2008 . Amides are also used as ligands due to their excellent coordination abilities (Wu et al., 2008 (Wu et al., , 2010 . Crystal structures of some acetamide derivatives, viz., 2-(4-bromophenyl)-N-(2-methoxyphenyl)acetamide (Xiao et al., 2010) , N-benzyl-2-(3-chloro-4-hydroxyphenyl)acetamide (Davis & Healy, 2010), 2-(2,2-dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1-benzofuran-7-yloxy)-N-(o-tolyl)acetamide (Li et al., 2010) , N-benzyl-2-(2-bromophenyl)-2-(2-nitrophenoxy) acetamide (Li & Wu, 2010) and N-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-(8-quinolyloxy)acetamide monohydrate (Wang et al., 2010) have been reported. In view of the importance of amides, we report herein the crystal structure of the title compound, (I), C 18 H 13 ClFNO.
In the title compound, C 18 H 13 ClFNO, the dihedral angle between the mean planes of the chloro, fluoro substituted benzene ring and the naphthalene-1-yl ring is 60.5 (8)° (Fig. 2) . Bond distances are in normal ranges (Allen et al., 1987) .
Crystal packing is stabilized by N-H···O hydrogen bonds ( Fig. 3 and Table 1 ).
Naphthalen-1-ylacetyl chloride (0.204 g, 1 mmol) and 3-chloro-4-fluoroaniline (0.145 g, 1 mmol) were dissolved in dichloromethane (20 mL). The mixture was stirred in presence of triethylamine at 273 K for about 3 h (Fig. 1) . The contents were poured into 100 ml of ice-cold aqueous hydrochloric acid with stirring, which was extracted thrice with dichloromethane. Organic layer was washed with saturated NaHCO 3 solution and brine solution, dried and concentrated under reduced pressure to give the title compound (I). Single crystals were grown from toluene by the slow evaporation method (M.P.:

The N-bound H atom was located in a difference Fourier map and refined isotropically with a distance restraint of N-H = 0.86 (2) Å. All of the remaining H atoms were placed in their calculated positions and then refined using the riding model, with C-H lengths of 0.95 Å (CH) or 0.99 Å (CH 2 ). Isotropic displacement parameters for these atoms were set to 1.19-1.21 (CH) or 1.20 (CH 2 ) times U eq of the parent atom. Figures   Fig. 1 . Reaction scheme of the title compound, (I). 
Crystal data 
Geometry. All esds (except the esd in the dihedral angle between two l.s. planes) are estimated using the full covariance matrix. The cell esds are taken into account individually in the estimation of esds in distances, angles and torsion angles; correlations between esds in cell parameters are only used when they are defined by crystal symmetry. An approximate (isotropic) treatment of cell esds is used for estimating esds involving l.s. planes. 
Reimbursement databases are potentially invaluable tools to develop and conduct pharmacoepidemiological studies on drug use and are extensively used [1] . Compared to fieldbased studies, database studies present numerous advantages such as rapid access to a large number of patients and data but also the real observational character of the information gathered. However, a problem that is classically mentioned is the validity of the data, i.e., the concordance between real-life use and data from databases. Two types of factors may be distinguished. Firstly, there are factors related to the structure of the database: the population covered by the database may be limited to an administrative region (e.g., Saskatchewan), a socio-demographic category (e.g., Medicaid for the elderly), a treatment setting (e.g., ambulatory), or a population with a particular occupation (which is the case in France). Secondly, there are factors related to the data. In this case, two parameters are of great importance: the reimbursement of the drug (and thus its presence in the database) and the capacity to capture real-life use. The presence of a drug, or class of drugs, depends on the reimbursement policy of the organization concerned. For example, in reimbursement databases of private health insurance companies, such as health maintenance organizations (HMOs), several drugs may be excluded owing to nonreimbursement. Similar situations exist for public health insurance systems. Regional differences exist in the reimbursement of vaccines by the Medicaid system [2] , and in France, third-generation oral contraceptives are not reimbursed. The capacity to capture real-life use also depends on the health insurance policy but also on the patients. Indeed, data regarding certain drugs may be of limited value for research owing to an annual expenditure limit, beyond which medications have to be paid out-of-pocket by patients, and patients could decide not to claim reimbursement of a drug [3] . Additionally, reimbursement may depend on indication. For example, in the French national health insurance system one of the marketed forms of sumatriptan is not reimbursed for the treatment of cluster headache, while it is reimbursed for the treatment of migraine. Furthermore, adherence to treatment may of course contribute to the degree of capture.
The relative importance of the parameters related to the data will influence the data available on drugs in such databases and thus the use and conclusions of any study performed. In the current study this is illustrated using the major reimbursement database of the French national health insurance system, one of the largest in the world.
France has a publicly funded health system that systematically covers the population. Within this system, three main insurance schemes provide reimbursement for health services. The insurance scheme with which individuals are affiliated depends on their employment, but the modalities of drug reimbursement are identical for all French health insurance systems.
The Caisse Nationale de l'Assurance Maladie des Travailleurs Salariés (Cnam-TS) is the main French health insurance system both in terms of the number of covered patients and in terms of reimbursement expenditure. It covers all the medical reimbursement of all employees and their families and covers 87% of the population in France, i.e., 55 million individuals. All reimbursement data are centralized in a single database called Erasme.
The Cnam-TS publishes a yearly report (Medic'AM) from the Erasme database detailing the number of reimbursed drug delivery units (boxes or delivery devices) bought from community pharmacies [4] . To determine the ability of the Erasme database to capture drugs, the Medic'AM data for 2004 was compared to the national drug sales for the same year obtained from the French Medicines Agency [Agence française de sécurité sanitaire des produits de santé (Afssaps)],, which compiles pharmaceutical industry reports of drug delivery units sold to community pharmacies each year [5] , including parallel imports [6] , and is considered as a gold standard source of information on the French market.
We used data from 2004 because, at the time we performed this study, the data of the French Medicines Agency were available only through 2006, and the Agency indicated in its report that the most recent data could change and thus that it was recommended that these not be used [5] . Ninety classes of drugs were investigated but only some of those with sufficient sales (>1 million delivery units) were retained for illustrative purposes.
Both the Cnam-TS and the Afssaps use the ATC classification system, the Afssaps only describing second level codes. Thus the comparison was performed at this level by comparing the number of drugs reimbursed in each ATC class (second level codes) to the number of drugs available on the French market. It would have been interesting to compare the defined daily dose, but this information was not completely available for the two sources of data. The proportion of pharmaceutical forms (i.e., tablet, suppository, syrup...) available over-the-counter (OTC) in a class and the average price in euros of a delivery unit for all drugs marketed in France were also obtained. The presence of drugs available OTC in each class was determined from a French government report on the OTC market [7] . According to this report, the proportion of each class available OTC was classified as follows: null when the class had no OTC drug, low for up to 20% available OTC, medium for up to 50%, and high above 50%.
At this point it is necessary to explain how the drug market works in France. Firstly, in France there is a pharmaceutical monopoly and thus, all drugs are only available in pharmacies (community or hospital). Secondly two notions are tightly linked: that of delivery and that of reimbursement. When a drug is delivered (by a pharmacist) it is either prescribed or not prescribed. Certain drugs are prescription-only; others are available with or without prescription (OTC). Concerning reimbursement by the public health insurance system, for a drug to be reimbursed it needs to be on the list of reimbursable drugs and it needs to be prescribed. For example, third-generation oral contraceptives are prescription-only and thus require prescription to be delivered but are not reimbursed. Acetaminophen may be reimbursed and is available with a prescription or OTC, but will only be reimbursed if it is prescribed. Drugs in France are delivered in nondivisible units, often corresponding to 1 month's supply, irrespective of the prescribed quantity. There is no limitation on the amount of drugs to be sold with or without prescription. Drugs prescribed and purchased by the population receive different levels of reimbursement (0, 15, 35, 65, or 100%) that are set by the government for each drug when it gains market authorization. This drug reimbursement policy is the same for all health insurance schemes in France. The French market for drugs in terms of prescription/reimbursement is illustrated in Fig. 1 . Table 1 shows the great variability in the proportion of drugs captured in the Erasme database of the total number sold. Depending on the ATC class, it ranged from 32 to 81% [93% if non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are taken into account)]. More than two-thirds of the prescription-only classes were found to have been captured in the database at least at a level of 60%. These classes mostly correspond to treatments for chronic disease. Average price of a delivery unit ranged from €2 (GB£1.8 or US$2.6) to €33 (GB£29.4 or US$43.7) but most remained below €15. The proportion of OTC drugs was high when capture was below 60%. The only exception was for the ATC code G03 (i.e., sex hormones and modulators of the genital system) where the proportion of OTC was low although 57% of the drugs were captured in the Erasme database (Table 1) .

The results show that the ability of the Erasme database to capture drug sales differed greatly among the ATC classes considered. Thus the use of this database to conduct a drug utilization study should be evaluated prior to performing a study. This variation did not seem to be associated with cost as the mean price was homogeneous. Despite no clear separation regarding OTC availability, the majority of the classes with high capture had a minority of products available OTC (proportion null to medium) and the level of OTC was high when capture was below 60%. Thus the percentage of OTC in the class seems to influence the capture. In the case of the ATC code G03, where the level of OTC is low, the low capture is due to the nonreimbursement of third-generation oral contraceptives ( Table 1 ). The proportion of capture for NSAIDs is striking but may be due to misclassification. Indeed, NSAIDs have two to four different ATC codes according to the substance concerned: for example, the ATC codes for ibuprofen are G02CC01, M01AE01, M02AA13, and M01AE51 [8] . Thus, it is possible that the two sources of data use ATC in a different manner, which may induce misclassification, but we are not able to verify this point.
The national health insurance systems in France impose no annual expenditure limit on any drug, and the vast majority of drugs are reimbursed, which helps explain why capture in the database was seemingly not affected by price. However, to be reimbursed the drugs need to be prescribed, which excludes capture of drugs obtained OTC. This is illustrated by a study reported by Lacroix et al. who did not succeed in assessing OTC use during pregnancy using the French health insurance reimbursement database of southeastern France [9] . Furthermore, certain prescription-only drugs, for example thirdgeneration oral contraceptives, are prescription-only but are not reimbursed. Such drugs belong to the ATC code G03: "sex hormones and modulators of the genital system" and account for approximately 40% of the oral contraceptives sold in community pharmacies in France [5] . This precludes use of reimbursement databases to investigate these, for example with regard to their safety [10] . Additionally, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (e.g., sildenafil, vardenafil) are not reimbursed for their main indication, erectile dysfunction, which limits the use of this database to [5] investigate possible nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NOIAN) [11] . These factors go some way to explain the relatively low capture of drug sales for this class of drug (57%). OTC availability for this class was marginal, but it may affect the capture of other drugs. For example, acetaminophen is frequently obtained in this way in France, which is reflected in the data presented (ATC code N02 includes acetaminophen).
Studies aiming to assess patterns of use or associated risk should make an attempt to circumvent this limitation. In some countries the market share of OTCs is low and/or the results of the study could be considered as a lower estimate of their effect [12] [13] [14] . For example, in Denmark very few NSAIDs are marketed OTC, and it is possible to conduct a study on this class of drugs without fear of major bias [15] . Another parameter to be taken into account is the relative market share that OTCs represent. Certain classes of drugs have a high proportion of products available OTC, but they represent only a small market share. For example, antacids that are available either OTC or with a prescription are frequently obtained OTC but are less used than proton pump inhibitors that are prescription-only and reimbursable. This explains the high proportion of OTC and high capture.
In the Erasme database, most drugs with capture of over 60% were prescription-only, but there were certain exceptions. For example, most vaccines sold were available OTC, yet they were the second most captured class of drugs. But this is not particularly surprising as most patients will visit their physician for administration of these and most vaccines are reimbursed.
The results observed and the differences between the classes of drug may be found in the other French reimbursement databases as the drug reimbursement policy is the same for all schemes in France. Furthermore, these probably exist in reimbursement databases found internationally as showed by Walley et al. [16] . The authors compared use of statins from proportion of the substances available over-the-counter (OTC) in the class, and the mean price per unit box are shown an administrative database used to reimburse pharmacists with data from a standard commercial source across 14 European countries and demonstrated that administrative databases record lower use [16] . Of course, this problem will depend on the drug reimbursement policy of the considered country, as we mentioned in the introduction. Such limitations have hindered previously reported studies, for example, Lambert et al., who used the California Medicaid database to assess the risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus with atypical antipsychotics, did not tackle the possible effects of exposure to ziprasidone or aripiprazole because neither was in the formulary [17] . Similarly, in an other study reported by Ward et al. who used the Saskatchewan database to study atypical antipsychotic agent compliance and the association with the risks of hospitalization note that the formulary restrictions ensured that the large majority of patients received risperidone, lowering the number of switches in this population [18] . Additionally, Gagne et al. note probable underestimation of the prevalence of drug use among pregnant women because OTC and complementary medicines were not captured in the Italian regional database they used [19] .
These variations in capture or presence of drugs have important consequences when a researcher intends to conduct a study using reimbursement databases. If the objective of the study is to characterize a real-life treatment pattern, all the drugs used in the source population must be captured in the database. For an etiological study, i.e., cohort or case-control, nested in the database, concerns regarding generalization of the study results may arise if some drugs, for various reasons, are under-or over-represented in the database when compared to the source population. Similarly, if the objective of the study is to assess the public health impact of the use of a class of drugs, results can be biased if not all drugs are represented. Another point to consider is that several databases do not include data on drugs used in hospitals (e.g., Erasme, GPRD, Medicaid, some HMOs, Memo). Depending on the objective of the study, this could be a concern or not. For example, a study intending to assess the persistence of a drug treatment is prone to underestimate this parameter if a marked proportion of patients had an extended hospitalization [20] [21] [22] [23] .
The current study presents several limitations. Although it is large, the Erasme database only covers 87% of the population in France. Other national health insurance systems cover farmers, their employees and the selfemployed, who are also able to obtain drugs from community pharmacies. Drug usage across these populations is unlikely to differ significantly, and thus the maximum capture of sales by the Cnam-TS database was approximately 87% of sales. The data presented herein were not adjusted for this, as it is impossible to verify the exact market share of the population considered by the Cnam-TS insurance system. This limitation precludes comment on capture in terms of absolute values, but does inform on the relative difference in capture between drug classes. As previously mentioned, the year 2004 was chosen to illustrate the problem owing to questionable validity of more recent data. This may be of limited importance since the type of problem will probably remain, regardless of reimbursement changes. It is also possible that the different use of ATC between the two sources of data may have induced misclassification (see explanation regarding NSAIDs above). Nevertheless, if this problem exists it concerns only a few classes of drugs well known to have several indications and thus several ATC codes. This reinforces the idea that researchers must be aware of how data are coded.
Another point is that every year there are some changes in the reimbursement policy in France, but as the changes have only a minor impact on all the market drugs, this cannot challenge our conclusions. Thus, this parameter does not change the message of this study: one must be aware of the data in the database before using it. There may also be a bias in timing when comparing data captured through the two separate sources since pharmacies may order drugs one month and dispense in another one. This too may be of limited importance because there are no rapid changes in utilization, switching in OTC status or hoarding due to reimbursement changes. Moreover the changes may also be too small to have important consequences on the data presented, which represented a high volume.
Despite these limitations, our results highlight the importance of taking into account the capacity for a reimbursement database to capture drugs. We believe that reimbursement databases, and in particular the Erasme database presented in this paper, are useful tools for pharmacoepidemiological research. Indeed, Erasme includes a large population and most of the drugs marketed in France. Thus, this database has been extensively used for 20 years for epidemiologic and pharmacoepidemiologic research [24] . It is crucial to know the structure of a database, especially if it was not originally developed for pharmacoepidemiological research.
The example of the Cnam-TS database (Erasme) highlights the importance of understanding the characteristics of reimbursement databases when performing research in order take into account the strengths and weaknesses. This is applicable to other such databases, whatever the country or objective of the study.
Contributors: PhL, BB, MM and KML designed the study. PhL coordinated data collection. PhL, KML performed analyses. KML, PhL, MM interpreted the results. KML, PhL, BB contributed to writing the paper. PhL is the guarantor for the paper.
Conflict of interest None declared.
Solid State Analyses (s6-s16) III-3. X-ray single crystallographic studies and Table S1) IV. Solution State Analyses (s17-s31) 


)
All reagents were purchased from Aldrich and used without further purification. Proton NMR, 13 ESI mass spectrometry was performed using a Varian QF ESI 9.4 Tesla instrument with Internal Calibration. The resulting UV-Vis spectra were then recorded from 400 to 800 nm using a Varian Cary 5000 spectrophotometer at room temperature and monitoring the change in spectral signature. The cell length was 10 mm.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out using a Zeiss Supra 40VP FE-SEM instrument. The samples were prepared on a silicon wafer, which was cleaned using nitric acid prior to use. The wafer was then dropped into a polymer dispersion and dried immediately for 1 hour at 25 o C prior to commencing the analyses.
Dynamic light scattering (DLS) analyses were performed on a custom-built Brookhaven ZetaPlus apparatus with calculations of the size distributions and distribution averages being performed using the ISDA software package (Brookhaven Instruments Company), which employed single-exponential fitting, cumulants analysis, and non-negatively constrained least-squares (NNLS). A distribution of hydrodynamic diameters was obtained on the basis of the Stokes-Einstein equation for the diffusion coefficient. All distributions were weighted by volume. The scattering angle was set to 30º while the temperature was held at 25°C. Prior to analysis, all solutions were filtered through a 0.45 µm PTFE membrane filter (Millipore Corp., Medford, MA). and 6d were collected at -50 °C on a Rigaku SCX-Mini diffractometer using a monochromatized MoKα source (λ = 0.71070 Å) equipped with a Mercury CCD area detector. X-ray crystallographic data for 6a and 4 were collected at 100 K under a cold nitrogen stream on a Rigaku AFC8 diffractometer equipped with a Saturn CCD area detector and a graphite monochromatizedMoKα source (λ = 0.71070 Å). The frame data were integrated and corrected for absorption effects using the Rigaku/MSC CrystalClear program package (s3).
All structures were solved by direct methods and refined by full-matrix least-squares on F 2 with anisotropic displacement parameters for the non-H atoms using . The function, Σw(|Fo| 2 -|Fc| 2 ) 2 , was minimized, where w = 1/[((Fo)) 2 + (X*P) 2 + (Y*P)] and P = (|Fo| 2 + 2|Fc| 2 )/3 and the parameters, X and Y, are
suggested during the refinement process. The hydrogen atoms were calculated in ideal positions with isotropic displacement parameters set to 1.2xUeq of the attached atom (1.5xUeq for methyl hydrogen atoms). Neutral atom scattering factors and values used to calculate the linear absorption coefficient are from the International Tables for X-ray Crystallography (1992) (s5). All the calculations were carried out with the SHELXTL program (s6). The details of the crystallographic data are summarized in Table S1 . Compound 4a (2.00g, 6.13mmol) was dissolved in acetone (300 ml) and trifluroacetic acid (1.9 ml, 24.52 mmol) was slowly added. The mixture was then stirred for two days at room temperature, after which point 6 ml of triethylamine were slowly added. After removal of the solvent by evaporation,the resulting brownish oil was redissoved in CH 2 Cl 2 , washed with water, and dried over anhydrous MgSO 4 . The resulting crude product was purified by silica gel column chromatography using CH 2 Cl 2 as the eluent; this yielded the two diastreomers 4 and 5. 148.1, 139.7, 134.1, 127.5, 117.2, 106.9, 104.2, 45.0, 35.4, 30.0, 27.7, 27. In order to characterize the solid-state products resulting from the interaction between the electron rich TTF- Figure S10 -S12, these mixture-derived materials differed significantly in terms of both their morphologies and colors from either set of components used to effect the purported self-assembly, i.e., the TTF-C4Ps (yellow blocks) or DNP-C4Ps (orange blocks Figure S14 and S15.
Both 6a and 6d contain the constituent calixpyrrole building blocks in their respective 1,3-alternate conformations.
The other geometric features are consistent with the existence of arrays that built up via a combination of heterocomplementary directional hydrogen bonding and electron donor acceptor interactions as noted in the main text. s7
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to observe the morphologies of the self-assembled materials 6a-e. The samples were prepared on Silicon wafer, which was cleaned using nitric acid prior to use. The wafer was then dropped into a polymer dispersion, and then immediately dried for 1 hour at 25 °C prior to commencing the analysis. After coating with 15 nm Pt/Pd (Cressington HR208 sputter coater), the specimens were imaged with a Zeiss Supra 40VP FE-SEM instrument, using an accelerating voltage of 10 kV. mixture of 1 and 4a in chloroform. As shown in Figure S13 , the ensuing structural analysis revealed that two DNP-DPM molecules are located inside the two cavities of this benzannulated TTF-C4P, which exists in its 1,3-alternate conformation. On the basis of this structural analysis, it is inferred that both hydrogen bond and electron donoracceptor interactions are present within the complex. This conclusion is supported by the short separations seen between the oxygen atoms of the nitro groups in the DNP-DPM guests 4a and the pyrrolic protons of the benzo-TTF-C4P 1 (the relevant distances range from 2.89 to 2.95 Å), as well as the separation of 3.29-3.55 Å between the electron rich TTF and the plane of electron deficient dinitrobenzene units.
2. Synthetic procedure for obtaining single crystals of 6a and 6d; description of related crystallization efforts.
containing the corresponding TTF-C4P and DNP-C4P building blocks in chloroform, into which pentane was slowly diffused over the course of two weeks at ambient temperature. Attempts to obtain diffraction-grade single crystals from other combinations of precursors were not successful, although they yielded brownish materials with long, needle shaped domains. However, in the case of the crystallization chamber containing an equimolar mixture of 3 and 5, two sets of single crystal with different colors (yellow and orange) were found. They were physically separated and subject to X-ray crystallographic analysis. This revealed the crystals as corresponding to the starting materials, namely 3 and 5, respectively. 4mM) to the original mixtures, a sudden color change was observed with the solutions becoming orange rather than brown. Pentane was then allowed to diffuse into the resulting reaction mixtures over two weeks. Two sets of single crystals suitable for X-ray single crystallographic analyses (yellow and orange) were isolated. They were physically separated and their diffraction data were collected. The resulting X-ray analysis of these crystals revealed them to be 1•TEACl (yellow crystal), 4•TEACl and 5•TEACl (both orange crystals).
Single crystals of 1•(TNB) 2 and 4 were prepared by slow diffusion of pentane into a chloroform solution containing 4 equivalents of TNB, the benzannulated TTF-C4P 1 (2 mM) and the trans-DNP-C4P 4 (2 mM). It is worth noting that addition of TNB resulted in a sudden color change in the solution color from brown to dark blue.
From this crystallization process, two sets of colored crystals suitable for X-ray single diffraction analysis were isolated as light orange and dark blue crystals, respectively. The resulting X-ray analyses revealed that the orange crystals corresponded to 4, whereas the dark blue crystals were the complex 1•(TNB) 2 . Similarly, single crystals of 5 and 2•(TNB) 2 were obtained from a mixture of 2 (0.2 mM), 5 (0.2 mM), and 4 equivalent TNB.
Figure S13. X-ray crystal structure of 1•(4a) 2 . Displacement ellipsoids are scaled to the 30% probability level.
Figure S14. Two views of the X-ray crystal structure of 6a designed to highlight the hydrogen bonding and charge transfer interactions that make up the extended array. Displacement ellipsoids are scaled to the 30% probability level.
s11 Figure S15 . Two views of the X-ray crystal structure of 6d designed to highlight the hydrogen bonding and charge transfer interactions that make up the extended array. Displacement ellipsoids are scaled to the 30% probability level. Figure S16 . Single crystal X-ray diffraction structure of the benzannulated TTF-C4P 1 and photograph of the crystal subject to analysis (left inset). Displacement ellipsoids are scaled to the 30% probability level. Displacement ellipsoids are scaled to the 30% probability level. Figure S21 . Single crystal X-ray structure of 2•(TNB) 2 and photograph of the crystal subject to analysis (left inset).
Displacement ellipsoids are scaled to the 30% probability level. Figure S22 . Two views of the single crystal X-ray diffraction structure of trans-DNP-C4P 4 and photograph of the crystal subject to analysis (left inset). Displacement ellipsoids are scaled to the 30% probability level. Figure S23 . Two views of the single crystal X-ray diffraction structure of cis-DNP-C4P 5 and photograph of the crystal subject to analysis (left inset). Displacement ellipsoids are scaled to the 30% probability level. All structures were solved by direct methods and refined by full-matrix least-squares on F 2 with anisotropic displacement parameters for the non-H atoms using SHELXL-97 (s4). The function, Σw(|Fo| 2 -|Fc| 2 ) 2 , was minimized, where w = 1/[((Fo)) 2 + (X*P) 2 + (Y*P)] and P = (|Fo| 2 + 2|Fc| 2 )/3 and the parameters, X and Y, are
suggested during the refinement process. The hydrogen atoms were calculated in ideal positions with isotropic displacement parameters set to 1.2xUeq of the attached atom (1.5xUeq for methyl hydrogen atoms). Neutral atom scattering factors and values used to calculate the linear absorption coefficient are from the International Tables for X-ray Crystallography (1992) (s5). All the calculations were carried out with the SHELXTL program (s6). The details of the crystallographic data are summarized in Table S1 . Further details of the individual structures can be obtained from the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre by quoting CCDC numbers 831195 -831205.
IV. Solution State Analyses.
Polymeric aggregates, such as 6, made up from two hetero-complementary monomers, are expected to exist in maximal concentrations (for a given total monomer concentration) when the monomers are present in a 1:1 ratio. This is because an excess of either monomer is expected to result in a decreased average degrees of polymerization by acting as a chain stopper. As a test of this expectation, continuous variation plots (Job plots) were constructed for chloroform mixtures involving the more soluble benzannulated TTF-C4P 1 and the two DNP-C4Ps 4 and 5. As can be seen from an inspection of Figure S24 (s9) , such an analysis reveals a maximum at a mole fraction, x, of 0.5 in both cases. This value is as expected for a 1:1 binding process. Moreover, the highly symmetric nature of these plots reflects a binding equilibrium that is equally sensitive to changes in the relative concentration of either component. In detail, as listed in Table S2, The dotted red lines were computer-simulated non-linear curve fits of the corresponding data sets.
s18 Table S2 . Comparison of normalized relative product formation in continuous variation plots. 
As discussed in detail in the literature (s8), the isodesmic model is the simplest model for the description of extended supramolecular aggregates. An isodesmic model was assumed, (invariant K system), namely that the association (equilibrium) constant K n+1 for the addition of each additional monomer is equal to that for previous binding interaction, K n . Support for the use of an invariant K in our treatment comes from inspection of the Job plots, which proved highly symmetrical.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time such a treatment has been extended to systems based on hetero-complementary associations. Therefore, for the purpose of estimating the association constants, K, for each For formation of a dimer, the equilibrium is defined by
For trimers; the concentration, C 3 , is equal to sum of the concentrations of the two possible trimeric species. Thus,
Retaining the same term definitions but extending them to the tetrameric ensembles, Extending this definition to the level of an n-mer C n , allows C n to be expressed as
= C 1 and C n = (C' n-1 + C'' n-1 ); C' n-1 and C'' n-1 represent two scenarios, either binding of A or B.
Where, as noted above, C 1 , C 2 , C 3 , …C n are the molar concentration of monomer, dimer, trimer, … and n-mer species respectively.
According to the isodesmic model, each of the constituent binding interactions is equal. Therefore, under this
Therefore, C n can be simplified as
The term C T is (and was) the total initial monomer concentration. Since we know the exact starting concentrations of Generalizing to C n allows us to understand that this aggregated species contains n monomers. In other words, the number of monomers doesn't change but where they appear (monomer, dimer, trimer, oligomer, etc.) certainly does.
As a consequence, the total concentration of initial monomers, C T , can be expressed as This can be put in the form of a Taylor series
Allows equation (8) to be obtained from equation (6) 
Solving equation (8) leads to equation (9)
The number average aggregate size can then be calculated according to equation (10) (s8)
where C N is the concentration of all species such as monomers, dimers, trimers, and n-mers.
From equation (5), C n = 2K n-1 C 1 n ; therefore, we can obtain the following expression
Applying the series expansion 1 + x + x 2 + … + x n = 1/(1-x), gives
Combining equation (9) C T = 2C 1 /(1-KC 1 ) 2 with equation (10) C 1 = gives
To estimate K based on the electronic absorption spectra of equimolar mixtures of TTF-C4Ps and DNP-C4Ps, the following equation was used based on the isodesmic model described above.
The extinction coefficients at any given wavelengths can be simplified as (14) where X 1 and X a are the mole fractions; ε 1 and ε a are the extinction coefficients for the monomers and the aggregate species respectively.
Rearranging equation (14), we obtain
Combining the equation (9) C 1 = and equation (15) gives (16) where K is the association constant.
s21 Figure S25 . Plots of molar extinction coefficients as a function of total concentrations of equimolar mixtures of TTF-C4Ps (1, 2, and 3) and DNP-C4Ps (4 and 5) (left) and the estimated number average size of the resulting aggregates (right).
Six sets of UV-vis spectra of equimolar mixtures between TTF-C4Ps and DNP-C4Ps were recorded at various concentrations as solutions in chloroform. Changes in the absorption coefficients at various chosen wavelengths were plotted as the function of the total concentration of the two constituent macrocyclic species. The isodesmic model described above was then applied to obtain the association constants, K, using non-linear regression analysis of plots of the extinction coefficients vs total concentration. Based on these K values, the number average aggregate sizes of the ensembles produced from the six mixtures made up from the three TTF-C4Ps and two DNPC4Ps of this study were calculated. This was done by varying the concentration profiles of the mixtures and treating the resulting absorption coefficient vs. concentration data in accord with equation (16) above. As can be seen in Figure S25 , the resulting plots for all six titration curves were characterized by a hyperbolic curvature. This was true for all six combinations, and is taken as prima facie evidence of a higher degree of aggregation occurring as the total concentration of the constituent monomers is increased. In accord with design expectations and as discussed in the text proper, the extent of this curvature was greatest in the case of those combinations characterized by the strongest aggregation. This is reflected in the calculated K values and predicted ensemble size calculated using the isodemic model detailed above. s30 Figure S39 . NOESY NMR spectra of 6a, as constituted from an equimolar mixture of 1 and 4 at a total monomer concentration of 14 mM and recorded after the addition of four equivalents of TNB (two equivalents per monomer).
Note the disappearance of the intermolecular coupling peaks between the two calix[4]pyrrole macrocycles. These spectra were recorded in CDCl 3 at ambient temperature. The spectrum on the right is a blowup of the portion of the spectrum on the left contained within the blue box. Figure S40 . NOESY NMR spectra of 6a, as constituted from an equimolar mixture of 1 and 4 at a total monomer concentration of 14 mM after the addition of two total equivalents of TEACl (one equivalent per monomer). Note the disappearance of the intermolecular coupling peaks between the two calix[4]pyrrole macrocycles. These spectra were recorded in CDCl 3 at ambient temperature. The spectrum on the right is a blowup of the spectrum on the left contained within the blue box. s31
In order to investigate the effect, if any, that the addition of TEACl and TNB would have on the electrochemical properties of 6a ([1+4]), chloroform solutions of TEACl and TNB were titrated into a cell containing a CHCl 3 solution that was 2 mM of [1 + 4] that was also 0.5 M in tetrahexylammoniumhexafluorophosphate (THAPF 6 ). After bubbling with nitrogen gas for 10 minutes, cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were then carried out at ambient temperature using a CV-50W voltammetric analyzer (BAS) and a standard three-electrode cell equipped with a glassy carbon electrode, a reference electrode (Ag/AgCl), and a counter electrode (Pt wire). A scan rate of 100 mV s -1 was employed for all measurements. Values are expressed vs. Ag/AgCl. The potential of the Fc/Fc + under these solution phase conditions was found to be 0.50 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Figure S41 . Cyclic voltammograms of a chloroform solution containing 2 mM of both 1 and 4 recorded prior to and upon the addition of 2 mM of TEACl. THAPF 6 (0.5 M) was used as the supporting electrolyte; Ag/AgCl was used as as the reference electrode, and a platinum wire and glassy carbon were used as the counter and working electrodes, respectively; a scan rate of 100 mV/s was used. Figure S42 . Cyclic voltammograms of a chloroform solution containing 2 mM of both 1 and 4 recorded prior to and upon the addition of 4 mM of TNB. THAPF 6 (0.5 M) was used as the supporting electrolyte; Ag/AgClwas used as asthe reference electrode, and a platinum wire and glassy carbon were used as the counter and working electrodes, respectively; a scan rate of 100 mV/s was used.
were distributed on a body-weight (W) basis into two groups of four animals each. Following a cross-over design, each group consumed a diet based on pelleted lucerne (Medicago sativa) hay alone or with the addition of barley (mixed diet). A balance trial was conducted on each diet. The digestibility of barley was calculated by difference. The experimental diets (Table 1) were given at a maintenance level, which was taken as 0.548 MJ metabolizable energy (ME)/kg Wo"5, a value for lactating goats which had been obtained in our laboratory by feeding-trials (Aguilera et at. 1984) . A previous estimation of the ME content of the diets was made from the reported energy value of the ingredients (Nehring et al. 1972) .
The male goats, previously dosed with Tetramisol (Sobrino, S.A.) against internal parasites, were kept in individual metabolism cages placed in an environmentally controlled room at 22-24'. They were fed once daily at 09.00 hours. Each digestibility trial consisted of a 15 d preliminary period followed by a 10 d balance period in which faeces and urine were collected daily and stored at -25". At the end of the collection period, representative samples were taken for analysis. No preservative for urine was used. The goats were weighed at the beginning and end of the balance period. Food intakes were recorded daily and any refusals taken into account. Throughout each balance period, on days 17, 19, 21 or 23, after a 24 h adaptation period, oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide and methane production of each goat were measured for 24 h in open-circuit respiration chambers described elsewhere , and heat production (HP) was calculated according to the equation of Brouwer (1965) . Measurements of HP were staggered as only two chambers were available. At the end of each balance experiment, the goats were fasted for 72 h and then, after a concomitant 48 h adaptation period to the respiration procedures, HP was also measured for 24 h. All animals had previously been trained to confinement and to the routine procedures of the chamber operations. As difficulties had been experienced in collecting urine in the confined space of the respiration chambers, no collection of urine was made during the HP measurements.
Total N in feeds, urine and wet faeces was determined by a Kjeldahl procedure using mineralization (Block Digestor Selecta S-509) and distillation units (Buchi Laboratoriums
Technik AG, Flawil, Switzerland; working capacity from 100 to 500 ml) and titration units from Metrom AG, Herisau, Switzerland (Dosimat 655, Digital pH-Meter 632 and Impulsomat 614). Crude protein was calculated from the N content using the factor 6.25. The gross energy of feeds and freeze-dried faeces and urine was measured in an adiabatic bomb calorimeter (Gallenkamp & Co. Ltd, London). Samples were freeze-dried in a polyethylene sheet of known energy value and their gross energy values were obtained by difference. Dry matter and organic matter determinations were carried out by standard procedures (Association of Official Analytical Chemists, 1975) .
The main effects of the experiments were analysed using a split-plot ANOVA (Snedecor & Cochran, 1980) , which was arranged as follows: experiments (1 df); live weight blocks within experiments (2 df); between goats (12 df), in the main plot analysis, and periods (1 df); diets (1 df); experiments x diets (1 df); experiments x periods (1 df), in the sub-plot analysis. When the analysis was significant, pairwise comparisons were made using the suitable standard error of difference (SED). Regression analysis was used throughout, with values being pooled whenever appropriate. Table 2 shows the apparent digestibility and the energy content of the experimental diets, the digestibility of barley being calculated by difference. Values from the two consecutive experiments performed with the goats (i.e. Expts 1 and 2) are presented separately. Significant differences in apparent digestibility and metabolizability of energy between diets but not between experiments were found.

The N balance results appear in Table 3 . The mean N retention during Expt 2 was higher than in Expt 1 as the result of a greater dietary N content and a slightly better utilization of the N absorbed. Also, the higher N content of the diets based on lucerne hay can account for the differences in N retention observed between diets. When N retention (NR) was regressed v. N intake (NI) (g/kg Wo 75 per d), two separate linear relationships, one for the lucerne diet and one for the mixed diet, were calculated. As these separate regressions did not differ significantly one from the other, a composite regression was established on pooled values :
(1) where RSD is the residual standard deviation, which suggested that at N equilibrium a daily intake of 409 mg N/kg W0'75 per d is required. In addition, the value of N balance at zero NI from this equation gives an estimation of the total endogenous nitrogen losses (TEN; 108 mg N/kg W075 per d).
Endogenous urinary N losses (EUN) were calculated from the intercept of the regression of urinary N (UN) v. NI (g/kg W075 per d). The composite regression was:
(2) UN = 0~3 3 6 ( s~0~0 2 8 ) N I + 0~1 1 9 ( s~0~0 1 I), r 0 . 9 1 1 ,~~~0~0 6 2 , which indicates a value for EUN of 119 mg N/kg Wo 75 per d. Table 4 shows the energy balance of goats fasted or fed at about maintenance level. The mean energy balance was close to maintenance and slightly negative for the mixed diet and the lucerne diet respectively. Energy intake during Expt 2 was higher than in Expt 1 and this fact is attributed to an underestimation made when predicting the ME content of the ... lucerne hay. Significant differences in live weight between diets were observed, which can be accounted for by differences in gut fill. In order to convert fasted weight into weight at maintenance, empty-body-weight (EBW, kg) was related to live weight (LW, kg) by the equation: EBW = LWI1.08 (Blaxter et al. 1966) . In the experiments with animals fed at about maintenance level, the overall apparent body energy balance was negative. In a small number of cases slightly positive energy retentions were found and then a correction for the intake of ME (MEI) above maintenance was made, as the efficiency of use of ME for production (k,) is much lower than that for maintenance (k,) . To this purpose, k f was estimated according to the equation: kf = 0.78 q,+0.006 (Blaxter, 1974) , where q, is the metabolizability of the diet. Mean values of fasting HP were 312 and 355 kJ/kg Wu'75 per d in Expts 1 and 2 respectively (Table 4 ). EUN was assumed to be 119 mg/kg W0'75 per d (equation 2). No statistical differences with respect to fasting HP between experiments were found.
Measurements of energy balance of goats at the two feeding levels considered (about maintenance and fasting) have been used to predict the energy intake at zero energy retention, using a linear regression of energy retention (RE) v. MEI:
(3) where RE = ME1 -total HP in kJ/kg W"'75 per d, b is k,, and a is fasting HP. The equation predicts ME for maintenance (ME,) when RE = 0 and also provides an estimate of the efficiency of utilization of ME for maintenance (k,). Table 5 summarizes the values obtained for ME, and k , for the lucerne diet and for the mixed diet (447 and 440 kJ/kg Wo75 per d and 0.73 and 0.74 respectively). As no statistical differences attributable to the diet were found, a composite regression was calculated giving for ME, a value of 443 kJ/kg W0'75 per d and for k, a value of 0.73. RE (kJ/kg Wn'75 per d) = -a+ b x ME1 (kJ/kg Wn'75 per d),

The digestibility and metabolizability coefficients for energy and the energy values of lucerne hay and barley were within the range of expected values.
Values for the intercepts from equations 1 and 2 were not statistically different. Thus estimates of both the TEN (equation 1) and EUN (equation 2) suggest that at the ME1 close to maintenance, EUN is the main endogenous N loss, in agreement with studies by Orskov & MacLeod (1982) . EUN can be estimated by direct measurement (Rajpoot, 1979; Mudgal & Singh, 1981) or by regression (equation 2), the former approach giving values somewhat lower than the latter. Reported values for EUN in non-lactating goats range from 40 mg N/kg Wn75 per M A I N T E N A N C E REQUIREMENTS I N G O A T S d in dry dwarf goats (Akinsoyinu et al. 1976) to 240 mg N/kg Wo 75 per d in castrated male goats (Ttoh et al. 1978) . The value of 119 mg N/kg Wo 7 5 per d obtained in the present paper from equation 2 is close to those obtained by Rajpoot et al. (1980 ), Reynolds (1981 and Guerrero (1982) in castrated male goats (1 15,120 and 123 mg N/kg W0-75 per d respectively) and somewhat lower than those of Majumdar (1 960) and Devendra (1982) in dry goats (126 and 133 mg N/kg W075 per d respectively). Our value for EUN is higher than EUN losses of 97 mg N/kg W0'75 per d, which can be calculated for a sheep of 30 kg live weight (LW) from the following equation (Agricultural Research Council, 1980) : EUN = 0.02348 LW + 054.
The maintenance requirement for N estimated in the present paper from equation 1 is lower than the values of 485 mg dietary N/kg W"'75 per d (Itoh et al. 1978 ) and 688 mg dietary N/kg W"'75 per d (Reynolds, 1981) . Akinsoyinu et al. (1976) obtained a value as low as 140 mg dietary N/kg W0'75 per d in West African dwarf goats.
As discussed later, in our experiments ME, was estimated as 443 kJ/kg W0'75 per d. According to the Agricultural Research Council (1980) , this amount of ME would yield 555 mg rumen microbial N, supplying 233 mg/kg W0'75 of net amino acid-N for tissue synthesis, a value which exceeds the TEN obtained in our experiments. Consequently, the goat's requirement for amino acid-N would be met by rumen microbial protein synthesis, which is in agreement with statements by Roy et al. (1977) for other ruminants fed at an energy level close to maintenance.
There are very few direct estimations of fasting HP for adult non-lactating goats in the literature. Our overall value of 324 kJ/kg Wo75 per d is close to that of Roy-Smith (1980) (331 kJ/kg W075 per d) but lower than those reported by Brody (1945) and Fujihara et al. (1973) (386 and 357 kJ/kg W075 per d respectively) and higher than the values for fasting metabolism in sheep published by the Agricultural Research Council (1980) . In addition, in our laboratory ) a value of 272 kJ/kg W" 75 per d was estimated for adult wethers following the same experimental approach as that described in the present paper, a value which was also found by Roy-Smith (1980) in his comparative study between goats and sheep.
In addition, following the equation proposed by the Agricultural Research Council (1980) for mixed diets : k , = 0.207 q, + 0.62, values of k , ranging from 0.73 to 0.75 would be derived from our experiments, which compare very well with those reported in the present paper (0.73) ( Table 5 ). As shown in Table 5 , ME, values were 447 and 440 kJ/kg W"75 per d for goats fed on the lucerne hay and the mixed diet respectively. As no statistical differences attributable to the diet were found, a composite regression was calculated giving for ME,,, a value of 443 kJ/kg Wo75 per d.
To our knowledge, all reported values on ME, for goats have been obtained by feeding trials. Our value of 443 kJ/kg Wo 75 per d, which is based on calorimetry results, is slightly higher than that estimated by the National Research Council (1981) for goats (424 kJ ME/kg Wu75 per d), a value which is derived from pooled means of experimental values. The ME, obtained in the present work is in the range of published values on fattening cattle and dry cows (from 418 to 469 kJ/kg Wo75 per d), which have been summarized by the Agricultural Research Council (1980) . From our results, a maintenance requirement of 5.7 MJ ME/d can be derived for goats of 30 kg LW. This value is higher than that reported by the Agricultural Research Council (1980) for sheep of similar weight (5.0 MJ ME/d) a finding which is in agreement with the higher fasting metabolism observed in goats.
Iron is essential to many cellular processes and transport across the cell membrane is facilitated by the transferring receptor (TfR) on the cell surface. The number of surface transferrin receptors is inversely proportional to intracellular iron. Cellular iron homeostasis is regulated through the action of iron regulatory proteins (IRPs). The IRPs bind to the mRNA of both ferritin and transferrin receptors and as intracellular iron concentration falls the IRPs upregulate the expression of transferrin receptors, while simultaneously reducing serum ferritin (3) . Ferritin concentration is an important indicator of total body stores and its concentration is taken to indicate deficient iron stores. However, the synthesis of ferritin is stimulated by infection, which may obscure an iron deficiency or indicate a larger iron store that truly exists (11) .Increased serum concentration of TfR is a sensitive and quick response to the development of iron deficiency.
Conversely, the serum TfR concentration decreases in response to treatment with iron before a change in hemoglobin occurs, so the response to iron can be monitored by changes in serum TfR. TfR-F index is proposed to be a more accurate reflection of tissue iron status than ferritin (1) . Maternal diabetes mellitus was thought to be associated with depletion of fetal iron stores in proportion to the degree of maternal control and presence or absence of complications of diabetes, but not maternal iron status. Infants of mothers with type 1 diabetes were found to have higher fetal iron demands at least partly explained by increased erythropoiesis secondary to intra-uterine hypoxia (11) . This study was performed to reveal the effect of maternal diabetes on fetal iron status parameters: STfR, ferritin levels and their ratio (TfR-F index), in cord blood samples of infants with and without maternal diabetes.
Two groups of mothers were categorized into group A: mothers confirmed as the diabetic group before pregnancy (n=50). IDDM: n=10(20%) and NIDDM: n=40(8o%). Group B: non-diabetic control mothers, (n=50) who had normal glucose tolerance test on routine screening, no previous gestational diabetes or a first degree relative with diabetes mellitus. The ages of all mothers (n=100) ranged from 19-43 years (Mean± SD = 28.42 ± 5.56), duration of maternal diabetes ranged from1 -8 years (Mean ± SD =3.44 ± 1.63). They were pre-gestational diabetes 1 -8 years in NIDDM Exclusion criteria: maternal blood diseases, maternal infection, maternal hypertension, maternal smoking and extremely premature. Two groups se bab fo were defined 1-Infants of the diabetic mothers (IDM): it included 50 fullterm neonates. They were 22 males (44%) and 28 females (56%).Their gestational ages ranged between 37-40 wks with a mean 37.86 ± 0.69 wks and birth weight between 3-5 Kg with a mean 3.87 ± 0.41 kg.
2-Infants of non diabetic mothers (Control group): it included 50 fullterm neonates they were 18 males (36%) and 32 females (64%). Their gestational ages ranged between 38-41 wks with a mean 38.54 ± 0.91 wks and birth weight between 2.8-4 kg with a mean 3.34 ± 0.30kg.
Exclusion criteria: extremely premature, congenital anomalies or inborn error of metabolism.
Thorough history taking with laying stress on:
Maternal: age, parity, exclusion of any chronic or blood diseases. Diabetes: onset, type, control, complications, iron supplementation during pregnancy, doses, duration.
Neonatal: mode of delivery, natal history, Apgar score, examination of gestational age, weight, length, head circumference, body mass index. The study was done after approval of ethical board of Ain Shams university and an informed written consent was taken from each participant in the study. 

Iron deficiency is the most common nutritional disorder worldwide. Iron deficiency during the fetal and neonatal (Perinatal) period can result in multiple system dysfunctions of multiple organs, some of which might not recover despite iron rehabilitation (9) . In this study we aimed to assess the effect of maternal diabetes on neonatal cord blood iron stores. This study was done on fetal iron status in the diabetic mothers and the control group using the transferrin receptos-ferritin index(TfR-F index) as a measure of cellular iron status and the results showed that infants of the diabetic mothers(IDM) had significantly lower iron stores represented as lower s.ferritin (P=0.000) and significantly higher serum transferring receptors(STfR) levels than infants born to the control mothers (P=0.038) and also higher sTfR level in insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) mothers and this was suggesting a state of increased erythropoiesis. This result agrees with those of Verner et al. (11) . who stated that maternal diabetes caused depletion of fetal iron stores and it was associated with higher fetal iron demands as indicated by higher STfR (P <0.01) level and TfR-F index in cord blood (P <0.01) in cord blood of IDM compared to infants of non diabetic mothers. Also, Hashim and Ameer (5) documented that cord blood serum ferritin was lower in IDMs group compared to infants of non diabetic mothers (p <0.05). Serum TfR levels were increased during periods of increased erythropoiesis reflecting increases in red cell precursor production and expression of TfR. also, maternal diabetes mellitus decreases fetal hepatic iron stores as indexed by abnormally low serum ferritin concentrations (11) . In our study we found that there was a significant increase in STfR(P=o.o58) in infants of insulin dependent diabetic mothers (IDDM)compared to infants of non insulin dependent diabetic mothers (NIDDM), while there was no significant statically difference in serum ferritin (P=0.139) and TfR-Findex between the two groups(P=0.804). This may be due to limited number of IDDM diabetic mother in this case. AS with insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) the transferrin binding capacity of the TfR in the placenta-of the diabetic mothers was reduced and the placental transfer capacity was decreased, there by reducing fetal iron stores and increase STfR expression due to increased erythropoiesis and increased fetal iron demand which may exceed placental iron transport capacity (11) . In our study, we found that IDMs were born earlier with cesarean section this is in agreement with the results of Wagner et al (13) who indicated that in IDMs preterm labor has a higher incidence. This is in contrast with the results of Hashim and Ameer (5) . who showed no significant difference between IDM and infants of non diabetic mothers groups regarding the gestational age at the time of delivery. In our study this was due to predominantly more elective sections being performed,
In our study we found that APGAR score at 1 minute in IDMS s (3-7) was significantly lower compared to the control group mostlyand this maybe due to C-section, difficult birth and fluid in the baby's airway. Maternal diabetes is known to have many effects on the fetus and interaction of a number of hormones, such as insulin-like growth factor which may has significant influence. The insulin-like growth factor system is essential for growth and development (7) . The rates of macrosomia are 3.5-4.5 times greater among IDMs with pregestational diabetes than those found in infants born to non diabetic mothers (8) .; the number of IDMs with macrosomia was declined from 60% to approximately to 20%-35%, probably secondary to aggressive diagnosis and the control of diabetes during pregnancy (6) . Our study showed a highly significant difference between IDMs and the control group regarding birth weight. The mean birth weight of IDMs was 3.87 ± 0.41gr, while that of the control was 3.34 ± 0.30gr (P≤0.001),. This agrees with the results of Ceitin (1) . Infant's birth weight (g) 3936 ± 681 (IDM)vs 3356 ± 174 infants of the healthy control group. This may be explained by the poor control of diabetes mellitus in our study due to hyperglycemia in the fetus results in stimulation of insulin, insulin like growth factors, growth hormone and other growth factors which, in turn, stimulate fetal growth and deposition of fat and glycogen. The positive correlation between levels of IGF-1and birth weight, cord hemoglobin and ferritin levels in healthy term infants was studied by Kurtoğlu et al.
. Adequate maternal transferrin saturation will impede absorption of supplemented iron from her gastrointestinal tract. Furthermore, placental iron transport may also be partially dependent on the degree of saturation of maternal transferrin. It is possible that iron supplementation after birth can rapidly replete the depleted iron stores in irondeficient IDM. However, the efficacy of such therapy in normalizing the iron status and in correcting neurobehavioral impairments has not been studied (9) . In our study, we found that there was no statistical difference between the diabetic mothers as regard age, parity, duration of diabetes and HbA1c; this inconsistency may be due to the limited number of cases in the present study.
In our study, there was no statistical difference between mothers of the diabetic and control group as regard hemoglobin and blood indices.
Our study showed a significant increase in hemoglobin (p=0.000) level, hematocrit, RDW (P=0.036) and MCV(0.000) in IDMs as compared to the control group, this may be explained by diabetes mellitus during gestation is associated with maternal and fetal hyperglycemia, fetal hyperinsulinemia, increased fetal metabolic rate and oxygen consumption, The increased fetal oxygen consumption in a relatively hypoxic intrauterine environment stimulates erythropoiesis and expands the fetal RBC mass. Ceitin (1) stated that infants of the diabetic women were often polycythemia at birth and this may be a reflection of fetal response to chronic intrauterine hypoxia which led to increased erythropoiesis. On the other hand Hashim and Ameer (5) . Stated that there was no significant difference between IDMs and the controls regarding PCV, MCV, and RDW (P>0.05) in their study.
There was a significant decrease in MCV in the control mothers compared to diabetic mothers group, while no significant statistically difference was detected between the two groups as regard hemoglobin and blood indices MCH, MCHC and RDW. This may be due to increased maternal age or nutritional status as the mothers were not divided into groups according to their ages to determine effects of age on the red cell indices in this study. In this study there was a positive correlation between maternal HbA1c and neonatal MCH, sTfR and TfR-F index, while there was a negative correlation between maternal HbA1c and neonatal S.ferritin and. Also, there was negative correlation between maternal age and neonatal MCH and MCHC This disagrees with the results of Danish et al.
. who stated that maternal age has no influence on complete blood count parameters of newborns between two groups of mothers categorized according to their age. Correlation between HbA1C and other parameters was explained with the effect on intrauterine fetal hypoxia with fetal hyperglycemia, increased erythropoiesis and depleted fetal iron stores which were expressed with increased StfR, decreased s.ferritin and increased erythrpoiesis associated with maternal diabetes mellitus which was proportionate to the degree of maternal diabetes control and presence or absence of diabetes-related complications and not the maternal iron status (11) . Fetal iron stores are directly related to gestational age where earlier gestation is associated with lower iron stores showed positive correlation between s.ferritin and gestational age. The lowest stores were found in extremely preterm infants (11) . this is may be due to the late passage of iron through the placenta during the third trimester of pregnancy These results are similar to another study which showed that there was a significant association between S. ferritin, gestational age (5) .
There was a statistically significant positive correlation between neonatal sTfR and maternal HbA1c (P=0.000), while there was a negative correlation between neonatal sTfR and APGAR score 1 min (P=0.017) and 5min(P=0.003) among the IDMs. This agrees with results of Sweet et al (11) who reported that depleted fetal iron stores were associated with maternal diabetes mellitus and it was is proportional to the degree of maternal diabetes control and presence or absence of diabetes-related complications and not the maternal iron status.
HbA1C as an indicator of maternal diabetes control during pregnancy was divided as Excellent 4-6% =24% (n=12) Good 7-8% = 60% (n=30) Poor >8% = 16% (n=8) This was explained by uncontrolled diabetes mellitus during gestation, associated with maternal and fetal hyperglycemia, fetal hyperinsulinemia, increased oxygen consumption in a relatively hypoxic intrauterine environment, stimulates erythropoiesis and expands the fetal RBC mass, thus reducing fetal iron stores and increasing sTfR expression also, sTfR was associated with lower APGAR score at 1and 5 minutes due to more cesarean sections associated with uncontrolled maternal diabetes mellitus.
This study showed that maternal diabetes affects fetal tissue iron stores at birth. S. ferritin was lower and sTfR was higher; this may be due to increased erythropoiesis, secondary to fetal hypoxia. Most IDMs were macrosomic and were born earlier with cesarean section. There was a significant association between S. ferritin, gestational age and birth weight.
Transformation of headache from an episodic to a chronic form in patients with migraine is a well-recognized phenomenon. A condition called 'medication-overuse headache' (MOH) has been included in the International Classification of Headache Disorders [1] . Overuse of abortive medication is a major factor contributing to this transformation. Epidemiological data has shown that almost every class of acute migraine medication, including ergots, triptans, and analgesics, is able to cause MOH if used excessively [2, 3] . Dihydroergotamine (DHE) was introduced as an abortive migraine medication in 1945 [4] . Like the ergot alkaloids, DHE binds to various receptors, including those for serotonin ( ) [5] . DHE has poor oral availability (less than 1%) [6] . Therefore, to improve its efficacy, this drug should be given parenterally. Although intravenous, intramuscular, and subcutaneous DHE are effective in aborting migraine attack, these parenteral routes are considered invasive and not suitable for patients to use for self-medication. As a result, the probability of overusing DHE by these methods of administration is minimal. However, an orally inhaled DHE has recently been introduced. A clinical trial assessing the efficacy of an orally inhaled DHE showed its clinical efficacy over placebo [7] . Its efficacy and convenience allows the patients to self-medicate. This increases the possibility of overuse of this compound, especially in those who suffer from frequent attacks. Whether or not chronic DHE exposure can lead to MOH remains uncertain.
The objective of this study was to investigate whether chronic exposure to DHE can lead to MOH as assessed in a rat model of headache. We designed experiments according to our previous studies of chronic analgesic exposure. In those studies, we showed that animals with prolonged analgesic exposure demonstrated an increased susceptibility to develop cortical spreading depression (CSD), an electrophysiological phenomenon analogous to the aura phase of migraine [8, 9] . CSD activates the trigeminovascular system, including the large cranial vessels, proximal intracranial vessels, and the dura mater that are innervated by branches of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve [10] . Peripheral trigeminal activation leads to the stimulation of neurons in the superficial layers of the trigeminal nucleus caudalis (TNC), and then results in a primary headache. In this study we compared the effects of acute and chronic administration of ergot alkaloids on the development of CSD in rat brains. We also compared the trigeminal nociceptive response using expression of c-Fos in lower brainstem as an indicator.

Adult male Wistar rats weighing 250-350 g were used in the experiments and were purchased from the National Laboratory Animal Center, Mahidol University, Nakorn-Pathom, Thailand. Rats were housed in stainless steel cages in a ventilated room under a 12-hour dark-light cycle, and were allowed access to food and water ad libitum. All of the protocols used in this study were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
Rats were anesthetized by an intraperitoneal injection of 60 mg sodium pentobarbital (Ceva Sante Animale, Libourne, France) per kg of body weight. The level of anesthesia was closely monitored throughout the experiment and tested by lack of responsiveness to a tail pinch. A tracheotomy was performed for ventilation. Cannulation of the right femoral vein was performed for intravenous infusion of 0.9% normal saline and drugs. Blood pressure and blood gas were periodically monitored by catheterization of a femoral artery using arterial catheter (RFA-01, SAI Infusion, Libertyville, IL, USA), transducer (MLT844, ADInstruments, Dunedin, New Zealand), PowerLab data acquisition system (ML765, ADInstruments) and animal ventilator (Harvard Model 683, Harvard Apparatus, MA, USA). Membranes and extremities were monitored for signs of cyanosis, and only data from healthy subjects was reported.
The study was divided into two experiments. The first experiment was to investigate the effect of acute DHE administration on CSD development and trigeminal nociception. In the first experiment, rats were divided into an acute DHE group (n = 14) and an acute control group (n = 9). The acute DHE group received 100 μg/kg of DHE (Tocris Bioscience, Bristol, UK), intravenously after the third depolarization wave of CSD was presented. DHE was dissolved in 0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at 100 mg/ml, and diluted in normal saline (100 μg/ml DHE). The dilution can attenuate protein plasma extravasation in the trigeminal ganglion. The control group was given the 0.1% DMSO as vehicle in the same volume and condition. The second experiment was to investigate the effect of chronic DHE administration on CSD development and trigeminal nociception. In the second experiment, rats were divided into four subgroups each representing different treatment times. A once daily intraperitoneal injection of DHE at 100 μg/kg was administered to different groups to represent chronic DHE treatment for 0 days (n = 11), 7 days (n = 11), 14 days (n = 12), and 28 days (n = 16) and 0.1% DMSO similarly administered to chronic control groups (n = 9, 8, 7, and 8, respectively). CSD was induced thirty minutes after the last administration of 0.1% DMSO or DHE in 0.1% DMSO.
In all experiments, CSD was induced by topical application of 3 mg solid KCl. A cortical depolarization wave of CSD presented as a result of the application. Electrocorticograms were recorded using an AcqKnowledge system version 3.7.3 (Biopac, Goleta, CA, USA) for 2 hours after acute administration and 1 hour after the final chronic administration. Following CSD induction and recording, rats were euthanized. The caudal brainstem and upper cervical cord that contain trigeminal nucleus caudalis (TNC) was isolated from the brain for western blotting.
Rats were placed in a stereotaxic frame; their heads fixed using ear bars. Skin and connective tissue was then removed to allow a craniotomy. Two Dihydroergotamine medication-overuse headache craniotomies (each 2 mm in diameter) were prepared using a dental drill (NSK, Tokyo, Japan). The frontal opening (1 mm anterior and 3 mm lateral from bregma) was for inserting a capillary microelectrode (Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA, USA). The parietal opening (7 mm posterior and 3 mm lateral from bregma) was prepared for CSD induction using cortical administration of solid KCl. The dura mater was carefully opened to expose the cortical surface. A capillary microelectrode filled with 4M NaCl, was inserted into the cortex at 500 μm depth using a hydraulic micromanipulator (Narishige, Tokyo, Japan). An Ag/AgCl electrode was placed on the rat skin as a reference. The variables, which included the number of peaks and area under the curve (AUC, the whole area of each waveform; mV.s) of waves within 2 hours for acute DHE administration and 1 hour for chronic DHE administration, were analyzed.
After recording the electrocorticograms, rats were euthanized using an excessive dose of sodium pentobarbital, and the TNC (obex to C1 level in the cervical spinal cord) was isolated. The ipsilateral TNC was homogenized in lysis buffer (10× RIPA buffer; Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA, USA) with 100× protease inhibitor cocktail (Cell Signaling Technology), and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was removed and stored at -80°C. The protein concentrations were quantified using a bicinchoninic acid-based protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Proteins (30 μg) were denatured at 95°C for 10 minutes, and loaded onto SDS-polyacrylamide gels where they were separated by electrophoresis. After running the gels, protein was transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Little Chalfont, UK). Mouse anti-cFos monoclonal antibody (Calbiochem, Darmstadt, Germany); dilution 1:1000, and anti-mouse horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibody (SigmaAldrich); dilution 1:10000 were used for western blotting. c-Fos-immunoreactive protein bands were visualized on Amersham Hyperfilm for enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) (GE Healthcare) using an ECL kit (Thermo Scientific). Densities of the c-Fos protein bands at 55 kDa on developed and fixed film were measured by scanning the films on an model TX220 scanner (Epson Singapore) and the resulting tagged image file format (TIFF)s interpreted using Scion Image Corporation software, version Beta 4.0.2 (Frederick, MD, USA). Signals from blotting were normalized to the β-actin at 43 kDa in the same blot.
All data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Statistical analyses were performed by using SPSS (version 17; IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY). An independent samples t test was used to determine differences between the DHE-treated and control groups. A one-way ANOVA (Bonferroni post hoc test) was used to detect the change among chronic DHE administration or control groups. P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

A series of depolarization waves of CSD was generated after the administration of solid KCl. Acute DHE administration did not affect cortical activity (Figure 1) . Within the 2-hour recording time used for the acute DHE and control groups, the mean number of CSD waves was not significantly changed 18.36 ± 3.30 and 18.14 ± 5.76 (t test, P = 0.91, n = 14 and 9, respectively), and the sum of the AUC was 61.31 ± 11.64 and 52.54 ± 12.05 mV.s (t test, P = 0.14, n = 14 and 9, respectively).
The sum of the AUC significantly increased in the 14-day and 28-day chronic DHE administration groups (Figure 2) . The AUC for the 14-day chronic DHE administration group was 45.55 ± 7.16 mV.s compared with 36.48 ± 6.31 mV.s for the control group (t test, P = 0.03, n = 12 and 7, respectively). The AUC for the 28-day chronic DHE administration group was 52.15 ± 11.02 mV.s compared with 39.46 ± 5.65 mV.s for the control group (t test, P = 0.04, n = 16 and 8, respectively). By contrast, there was no significant difference in total AUC between the DHE and control groups for the 0-and 7-day DHE administration. The AUC for the 0-day DHE administration group was 41.72 ± 7.13 mV.s compared with 41.78 ± 12.97 mV.s for the control group (t test, P = 0.83, n = 11 and 9, respectively), while the AUC for the 7-day DHE administration group was 42.43 ± 8.55 mV.s compared with 39.41 ± 9.18mV.s for the control group (t test, p = 0.49, n = 11 and 8, respectively). The results showed that the overall AUC among DHE administration groups was significantly changed (one-way ANOVA, P = 0.02, n = 11, 11, 12, and 16 in each group, F = 3.555), while AUC in control groups was invariant (one-way ANOVA, P = 0.20, n = 9, 8, 7, and 8 in each group, F = 1.670). However, there was no change in the mean number of CSD waves between chronic DHE administration and control groups.
The expression of c-Fos was used as a marker indicating the level of neuronal activation of second order neurons in the trigeminal nociceptive system. Using western blotting, the c-Fos protein was quantified as to provide a relative density with β-actin ( Figure 3A) . Acute intravenous DHE administration significantly attenuated the c-Fos protein expression. The relative density of c-Fos was 0.70 ± 0.07 in the control group and 0.61 ± 0.02 in the acute DHE group (t test, P = 0.04, n = 9 and 14, respectively, Figure 3B ).
Intraperitoneal administration of DHE significantly attenuated the expression of c-Fos induced by CSD in the 0-day group as consistent with findings for the acute intravenous DHE administration group ( Figure 3C) . The relative density of c-Fos in the 0-day control was 0.62 ± 0.08 and 0.48 ± 0.10 for the 0-day DHE administration group (t test, P = 0.04, n = 9 and 11, respectively, Figure 3D ). Parallel to the change in the CSD AUC, there was significant increase of c-Fos expression within 14 days exposure to DHE and the expression remained significantly elevated for up to the 28 days examined. The relative c-Fos density in the TNC was 0.61 ± 0.04 in the control group and 0.85 ± 0.13 after 14-day of DHE administration (t test, P = 0.02, n= 7 and 12, respectively, Figure 3D) . The relative c-Fos density was 0.59 ± 0.06 for the control and 0.79 ± 0.13 after 28-day of DHE administration (t test, P = 0.02, n = 8 and 16, respectively, Figure 3D ). However, there was no significant difference between the relative c-Fos density the control group 0.49 ± 0.11 compared with the relative density of 0.56 ± 0.10 after 7-day DHE administration (t test, p = 0.47, n = 8 and 11, respectively, Figure 3D) . Examination of the western blot analysis also showed the significant changes of the overall c-Fos expression among DHE administration groups (one-way ANOVA, P = 0.0002, n = 11, 11, 12, and 16 in each group, F = 15.41), while there was no change of c-Fos expression in control groups (one-way ANOVA, P = 0.64, n = 9, 8, 7, and 8 in each group, F = 0.57). 
The present study shows that acute and chronic exposure to DHE affects cortical excitability and the trigeminal system differently. Acute exposure to DHE attenuated the expression of c-Fos in the TNC without change in CSD response. By contrast, chronic exposure to DHE increased the AUC of CSD waveforms and CSD-evoked c-Fos expression in the caudal brainstem. These apparently paradoxical changes may reflect that chronic DHE exposure results in an increase in cortical excitability and increased trigeminal nociception.
Although we have indicated interesting findings throughout the present study, there were four issues that should be considered. First, topical application of KCl is a robust method for CSD induction where a threshold of cortical susceptibility is not assessed. Nevertheless, it is a standard protocol for inducing repetitive CSDs to evaluate the level of cortical excitability that we have used in the previous studies [8, 9, 11] . Second, we attempted to quantitate total c-Fos expression in the TNC by western blotting analysis. Western blotting offers advantages of sensitivity, specificity, and protein size determination Dihydroergotamine medication-overuse headache [12] . It is undeniable that low expression of c-Fos by weakly immunoreactive nuclei residing in the dorsal horn was also included when we have evaluated the change of c-Fos expression associated with chronic DHE treatment compared with the control groups. A further limitation is that we did not dissect out the dorsal medulla (trigeminal subnucleus caudalis) or trigeminal nucleus to enrich the potentially responsive areas and therefore apparent responses may have been dampened by c-Fos expression in irrelevant areas. Third, it is possible that chronic DHE administration alone causes an alteration of trigeminal nociception, and that the CSD intervention masks this data. Further studies are needed to examine this possibility. Fourth, the increase of AUC in CSD waves does not specifically correlate to c-Fos expression in TNC. Nevertheless, the apparently paradoxical changes may reflect that chronic DHE exposure results in an increase in cortical excitability and increased trigeminal nociception.
In our acute experiment, we found that DHE can attenuate c-Fos expression in the caudal brainstem. Our previous experiments using immunohistochemistry show that the majority of neurons in this area that express c-Fos after CSD were confined to the superficial laminae especially the TNC, an important nucleus controlling cranial nociception [8, 9] . The finding of a decrease in c-Fos expression in this area can be interpreted as a decrease in trigeminal activation and therefore nociception. This hypothesis is consistent with the antimigraine efficacy of DHE. Our experiments showed that acute DHE administration did not alter CSD generation. Administering DHE before or immediate after CSD induction showed the same results. It is known that DHE and other ergot alkaloids display affinity for adrenergic, serotonergic, and dopaminergic receptors, which probably explains its antimigraine effects [6] . Binding of DHE to adrenergic or serotonergic receptors on cranial vessels would cause vasoconstriction and might decrease the activation of perivascular nociceptors. Recent experiments showed that DHE can increase the analgesic effect of morphine and implies a central effect of ergots [13] [14] [15] . Thus, our findings suggest that abortive effect of DHE is the result of modulation of trigeminal nociception and does not rely on the modification of cortical activity.
The main findings of this study are the increase in the AUC of CSD waves and c-Fos expression in caudal brainstem after chronic DHE administration. Here, we showed that the attenuation of CSD-evoked c-Fos expression had normalized after DHE administration for 7 days. Moreover, c-Fos expression increased within 14 days of chronic DHE administration and the increase was maintained for up to 28 days during chronic administration. The increase in CSD-evoked c-Fos expression correlated well with the observed increase in the AUC of CSD. These findings simply imply the chronic DHE administration can lead to an increase in cortical excitability and facilitate trigeminal nociception. In a clinical context, chronic DHE administration can potentially cause MOH.
Although the exact mechanisms underlying MOH remain undefined, cortical hyperexcitability is a possible explanation [16, 17] . In our previous experiments, rats receiving chronic paracetamol exhibited a higher number of CSD waves, while the AUC of the waveforms was not different [8] . This pattern differed from what was observed in the present study, which showed an increased AUC of CSD waves, without a change in the number of waves. The difference between these two patterns may reflect a different pathogenesis. Increased frequency might imply an increased susceptibility to develop CSD, while an increased AUC may reflect delayed repolarization. Although alteration of the AUC relates to the change of cortical excitability reflecting the recovery cycle in migraine [18] , more studies are needed to clarify the interpretation of the AUC change at a cellular level. It is noteworthy that both increased susceptibility and widening of the CSD wave have been reported in a CACNA1a knock-in migraine mouse model [19] . Some clinical studies lend support to the concept of cortical hyperexcitability. Increased sensory-evoked potentials and decreased habituation have been observed in patients with MOH [20] . The decrease in habituation can be restored in patients with MOH who are successfully treated [21] . This clinical evidence suggests that cortical hyperexcitability plays a role in the pathogenesis of this condition.
The mechanism rendering the cerebral cortex to be hyperexcitable remains to be clarified. Clinical evidence shows that both specific and nonspecific abortive migraine medication can cause MOH. Because these drugs have different pharmacological actions, it is unlikely that MOH is caused by the specific action of any single causative agent. The more likely explanation is that all drugs might share some common mechanism in generating this phenomenon. Chronic medication may interfere with incoming nociceptive input and lead to subsequent plastic changes in both peripheral and central nociceptive systems. Deafferentation is a well-recognized mechanism generating neuropathic pain. Changes in algogenic protein expression in trigeminal ganglia and latent sensitization have been demonstrated in rats chronically exposed to triptans [22] . A derangement of the central serotonin-dependent endogenous pain control system induced by chronic medication has been proposed [16] . Observation of a decrease in serotonin in patients with MOH supports this hypothesis [23] .
In conclusion, our study demonstrated that chronic DHE administration can increase cortical excitability and increase c-Fos expression in caudal brainstem. Our preclinical evidence suggests the possible adverse effect of chronic DHE use in causing MOH. Therefore, like other acute medication, the form of this compound for self-medication should be used with caution.
them into three groups according to the allele at the SNP, AA (n=26), AC (n=43) and CC (n=16) (A is a risk allele), and investigated the association of the SNP and organ involvements.
Results: There were no differences in the complication rates of carotid arterial lesions among the groups (AA 78.9%, AC 63.9% and CC 80.0%). Background: Behcet's disease (BD) is a multi-systemic chronic inflammatory disorder which involves the vasculature tree of all sizes. Subclinical endothelial injury as a result of chronic inflammation in BD has been associated with thrombosis and arterial stiffness, risk factors for ischemic heart disease (IHD) [1] [2] [3] [4] . However, data regarding the association between BD and IHD and the impact of various risk factors on this association, is scarce [3] [4] [5] . Objectives: To examine the association between BD and the development of IHD and its potential impact as a cardiovascular risk factor. Methods: This study was conducted as a case-control study utilizing the database of Clalit Health Services. The proportion of IHD was compared between patients diagnosed with BD and age-and gender-matched controls. Univariate analysis was performed using Chi-square and student t-test and a multivariate analysis was performed using a logistic regression model. Results: 871 BD patients and 4,439 age-and gender-matched controls were included in this study. The proportion of IHD amongst BD patients was increased in comparison with controls (10.9% vs. 7.52% respectively, p-value =0.001). After controlling for cofounders, BD was associated with IHD on multivariate analysis (odds ratio 1.485, 95% confidence interval 1.106-1.982, Table 1 ). When the comparison between BD patients with IHD and controls with IHD was stratified according to risk factors, age younger than 70 and male gender were both found to be significantly elevated in the BD group. Background: Papulopustular lesions (PPL) are the most common skin lesions in Behçet's syndrome (BS). Objectives: To assess whether PPL are different in BS according to localization, age, sex and medications used when compared to rheumatoid arthritis patients (RA) and apparently healthy subjects (HS). Methods: 209 consecutive BS patients who were routinely followed in our dedicated BS center were studied. Patients with RA (n=146) who were followed up in the rheumatology outpatient clinic of the same unit and HS (n=149) were used as controls. All subjects were clinically evaluated by the same dermatologist and all skin lesions (papules, pustules, comedones, folliculitis, cysts, nodules) on the face, trunk and legs were separately counted. Information regarding the demographic and clinical features of primary disease and medications used were obtained from patients' charts. Results: Subjects without PPL were excluded before analyses. Demographic features and mean number of PPL according to site of body were summarized in Table- 1. Mean number of total PPL were similar between BS and HS and significantly higher than in RA (p<0.001). Mean number of total PPL according to sex were similar in RA and HS but higher in male BS patients compared to female BS patients (p=0.04). When we analyzed the number of PPL according to different body sites, we observed that BS patients had significantly more lesions on the legs when compared to the RA patients and HS (p<0.0001). Number of PPL lesions tend to decrease as the patient ages in BS similar to RA and HS. When leg lesions were analyzed according to age, this difference remained in the age groups 31-50 and >50 but not in the age group ≤30. Corticosteroid use did not impact the results. 
Introduction Gonorrhoea rate continues to increase at alarming rates among men who have sex with men (MSM), particularly in young MSM, in Australia and worldwide. A recent study has shown that use of antiseptic alcohol-containing mouthwash can inhibit the growth of gonorrhoea in the pharynx. The aim of this study was to examine the willingness of MSM to change their behaviours to reduce the risk of gonorrhoea. Methods A cross-sectional questionnaire-based study was conducted among MSM attending the Melbourne Sexual Health Centre, Australia, between March and September 2015. Participants were asked how likely they would change their behaviours to reduce the risk of pharyngeal gonorrhoea. Six different strategies were asked: (1) stop tongue kissing with partners; (2) stop having receptive oral sex from partners (partner's penis in participant's mouth); (3) stop rimming partners (participant's tongue in or around partner's anus); (4) stop using saliva as lube for anal sex; (5) use condoms for oral sex; and (6) use alcohol-containing mouthwash daily. Results A total of 926 MSM were surveyed with a median age of 29 (IQR 25-36) years. The majority of MSM (65% [95% CI 62%-69%]) expressed they were likely to use mouthwash daily to reduce the risk of pharyngeal gonorrhoea, followed by stop using saliva as lube (63% [95% CI 60%-66%]), and stop performing rimming (49% [95% CI 46%-53%]). In contrast, the majority of MSM (78% [95% CI 75%-80%]) expressed they were unlikely to stop kissing to reduce the risk of pharyngeal gonorrhoea. Young MSM were more likely to use mouthwash daily to reduce the risk of gonorrhoea compared to older MSM. Conclusion Men are less likely to change their sexual practices to reduce the risk of pharyngeal gonorrhoea however they are likely to use mouthwash daily to reduce the risk, particularly younger MSM. (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) . Initially with a focus on prevention, the actions passed to integrate a broad set of objectives and contents of health, educational-preventive and care. Large number of schools work the themes; Low effectiveness of educational action. Availability of condoms in schools is little implemented.In the political environment, there is a resurgence of positions that are contrary to discuss sexual diversity at school with a reflection on the activities, mainly considering the interference of conservative political parties and the lobbying of Catholic and Evangelical churches with the decision-making bodies of politics and the management. Conclusion Young people remain as one of the key populations to control the epidemic. Future of STI and AIDS prevention in litigation schools: Most managers and stakeholders believe that action should be rethought and taken up in isolation or associated with complementary strategies; Others argue that it must be replaced, because it has failed and because the school has become a barrier to young people. UNESCO had a strategic and essential role to promote the approximation of interests and articulation and cooperation between the Ministries of Health and Education.

UNDERSTANDING SEXUAL HEALTH LANGUAGE: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT WITH REFUGEES FROM BURMA, POST SETTLEMENT IN AUSTRALIA
Nutritional rickets can be caused by both calcium and vitamin D deficiencies. A review by Pettifor [1] reported that while there is relatively little population data on the prevalence of nutritional rickets in developing countries, studies do suggest that vitamin D deficiency is common in countries and regions such as the Middle East, North India, China, Ethiopia, Yemen and Turkey. For Ethiopia, Prentice [2] , in a review of rickets, stated that the prevalence of rickets was as high as 40%, making it one of the highest in the world. A recent report showed vitamin D insufficiency in adolescents living in Ethiopia of 42% [3] , which was worse for those children living in urban centers or those wearing clothing that concealed most of the skin from sun exposure. In developing countries where calcium intakes are characteristically low and the population relies heavily on cereal-based staples, with few or no dairy products, dietary calcium deficiency appears to be the major cause of nutritional rickets among children [4, 5] .
Some studies suggest that rickets is an important child health problem in Ethiopia but the etiology is not known [1, 2, 6, 7, 8] . A review of pediatric admissions in Jimma hospital, South Western Ethiopia indicated that about 10 % of children were diagnosed to have rickets [6] . A second study in Jimma showed rickets prevalence of 4% in randomly selected children between 6-59 months of age [7] . This study indicated calcium as the cause of rickets in Ethiopia. However, in a study of 300 consecutive outpatients seen at the Ethio-Swedish Hospital, Addis Ababa, 122 (41%) had clinical signs of rickets [8] but neither calcium nor vitamin D deficiencies could be distinguished. Anecdotally, there has been indication of sun avoidance practices of lactating mothers and their children, but no published information exists. There is little information, therefore, about the major causes of nutritional rickets, namely vitamin D deficiency and calcium deficiency, among Ethiopian infants. To the best of the research team's knowledge, there is no study in the country looking at these major risk factors of nutritional rickets at the community level. Therefore, this study assessed the magnitude of the major causes of nutritional rickets in a woreda in Southern Ethiopia.
The study was conducted in Dale woreda (a woreda being a third-level administrative division of Ethiopia, composed of a number of kebeles) in the Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region (SNNPR) of Ethiopia, located in the Sidama Zone of the Great Rift Valley. Based on the 2007 Census conducted by the CSA [9] , the woreda has a total population of 242,658, of whom 122,918 (50.7%) are men and 119,740 (49.3%) women. A community based cross-sectional survey with both descriptive and inferential components was the design. All children who were the permanent residents in the study kebeles (villages) with the eligible age group of 6 to 23 months were included in the study population (n = 504), from which a total of 170 children were selected using a multi-stage sampling technique [10] . An interactive 24-hour dietary recall method was used to collect data on the intake of children using information from the caregivers. To enhance recall of consumed foods, picture charts were provided to the participants before the recall day. In addition, solid and semi-solid dough models and sample foods were used in the recall day to help quantify portion size estimation [11] . Standard cylinders and containers of water were used to measure the liquid food items.
For determining the history of sunlight exposure and socio demographic and economic data, a pretested structured questionnaire was adopted from previous studies of young children in SNNPR [12, 13] and from the Ethiopian demographic and health survey [9] . The recorded food items from the 24-hour dietary assessment were converted into nutrient content amounts using Ethiopian food composition table [14] , which is designed for cooked and raw foodstuffs and commercial foods [15] . Four foods which were locally purchased or collected from participants' households were used for food laboratory analysis to determine their calcium and phytate contents, and phytate-tocalcium ratio. These foods were dried overnight at 105 o C in Hawassa University Human Nutrition Laboratory, then powdered, packed and sent to a certified laboratory at the University of Saskatchewan, Canada for analysis. To determine phytate, the modified Wade's reagent method was used [16] . Flame Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (FAAS) (NOVAA300, Germany) was used for determination of calcium after acid digestion. Prior to analysis, lanthanum chloride (1%) was added to suppress interference from phosphorus. The phytate-to-calcium molar ratio of the selected food samples was calculated by dividing mmol of phytate by mmol calcium. A phytate-to-calcium molar ratio greater than 0.2 was applied as the cut-off point for undesirable for calcium absorption [17] . All of these analyses were done in triplicate.
Dietary diversity score (DDS) was calculated for each of the children. The minimum dietary diversity score (MDDS) was defined as the proportion of children who receive foods from at least four food groups using a standardized list of seven food groups [18] . In order to evaluate adequacy of dietary calcium intake of participant children, the WHO 1998 document was used [19] . Data from the structured questionnaire and 24hour dietary assessment was entered to the SPSS (statistical package for social sciences) software version 16 and checked for the completeness of the data.
Protein-energy malnutrition in children was determined as underweight, defined as -2 standard deviations (SD) under the normal weight-for-age (WAZ); stunting, -2 SD below height-for-age (HAZ); and, wasting, -2 SD below body mass index for age (BAZ). Anthropometric measurements (weight, length or height) of the young children were taken by trained health workers using standardized techniques and calibrated equipment. Weight was measured using an electronic scale (Seca 770), adjusted to zero for each measurement. Children were too young to stand; therefore, height was measured using recumbent length board to the nearest 1 mm.
Prior to the study, ethical clearance was secured from the institutional board of Hawassa University. Before the data collection started, informed written consent was obtained from the mothers. The purpose of the study was explained clearly to the mothers with the assurance that the information obtained from the respondents was to be kept confidential.

A total of 170 children aged 6-23 months were included in the study. The mean (+SD) age of the children was 14.4 (+4.7) months. The male to female ratio of the children was 1.2. Farming was the main source of livelihood for majority of the participant families. Regarding ownership of livestock, 102 (60%) of participant families had their own cow. About 41 (24.1%) of participant families had consumed the entire milk from their livestock; however, about 61(35.9%) of the families had partially consumed and partially sold the milk (Table 1 ).
Mean (±SD) weight and height of the children were 9.2 +1.7g and 74.3 +6.2cm, respectively. Mean (±SD) weight-for-age z-score (WAZ), height-for-age z-score (HAZ) and body mass index-to-age z-score (BAZ) of the children was -0.6 (±1.2), -1.1 (±1.5) and 0.2 (±1.4), respectively. From the 170 children, 23 (13.5%) had less than negative 2 WAZ score indicating underweight. About 38 (22.3%) and 8 (4.7%) of the children had less than negative two HAZ and BAZ scores, indicating high prevalence of stunting and relatively lower prevalence of wasting, respectively.
The commonly eaten foods are shown in Table 2 . The most common foods were fruit, especially avocado and banana. Milk and maize were eaten by approximately half of all the children. Corn bread, enset and potato were less commonly consumed. Overall, the mean DDS of the children was 3.1+ 0.8. Slightly more than one quarter (27%) of all the children had DDS of four or more.
Overall, the mean (± SD) intake of calcium was 407 ± 235 mg/day. Table 3 provides dietary calcium intakes as (mean ± SD) by age and sex. Of the 170 children, 45 (26.5%) had low dietary calcium intake from their complementary food. "Low" intake of calcium is defined as being below the age-appropriate Recommended Nutrient Intake (RNI) [19]: 336 mg (age 6-8 mo), 353 mg (age 9-11 mo) and 496 mg (age 12-23 mo). Mean daily dietary calcium intake of the male and female children was 403 ± 240 mg and 412 ± 230 mg, respectively; no significant sex difference was observed. Of the 94 male and 76 female children, 28.7% and 23.7%, respectively, had low dietary calcium intake from their complementary food compared with their age specific recommended nutrient intake (RNI) value (Table 3) . Younger children (ages 6-8 months and 9 -11 months) were less likely (44% and 46%) to have met the RNI value than older children (20%).
In Table 2 , the calcium content of commonly consumed foods is provided using Ethiopian Food Composition tables [14] . The main sources of calcium were milk and enset (also known as false banana, Enseteventricosum), although it should be noted that neither was the most commonly consumed. The other foods provided little calcium per serving.
Four selected sample foods, which were purchased or obtained from the woreda were examined (Table 4 ). These included mixes of prepared enset, wheat porridge, maize porridge and meten (packed mixed grain contains maize, wheat, barley, oats). Analyzed calcium and phytate values (per 100 g dry weight) are shown in Table 4 . The phytateto-calcium molar ratio of three of the sample foods was less than 0.2, indicating no effect on calcium absorption [17] . One food, the maize porridge mix, had the ratio above cut-off point suggesting a lower bioavailability of calcium in this food.
Practices about sun exposure and about knowledge of rickets were asked of the mothers ( Table 5 ). About 70 (41.1%) of the 170 mothers that participated in this study exposed their child to sunlight within 1(one) month of birth. Most of the children were exposed to sunlight for 20 to 30 minutes per day. From the total participant children, 84 (49.4%) were exposed to sunlight for 7 days in a week. About 153 (90.0%) children were exposed to sunlight without clothing. Sun exposure ranged from 0 to 8 hours per day. Most children (92.9%) played outside the house; the median duration of the children being outside was 1.5 (IQR = 1-2) hour.
One-fifth of participant mothers reported that there was sunlight avoidance practice in their areas at the early age of the child. The reported underlying reasons were: fear of cold, fear of "evil eye" of the sun, and fear of sunburn 'mich'. Regarding sunlight exposure during pregnancy, all respondent mothers reported they had spent most of their daytime outside the house and there was no sunlight exposure restriction during pregnancy in their locality. From the total respondent mothers, more than half (52.4%) did not know about rickets, and few of them were aware of how it would be prevented and/or treated using calcium and/or vitamin D. A small number (10%) of respondent mothers reported fenugreek (Trigonellafoenum-graecum) also called 'amesa', as treatment for rickets in their locality.
The study aimed to assess whether dietary calcium intake or sunlight exposure practices, which are factors related to nutritional rickets, were prominent in Ethiopia by studying one woreda. It was found that in this woreda that mothers reported having had heard of rickets. However, while the reported prevalence of rickets in Ethiopia was about 40 % as found by Muhe et al. [8] and reported by Prentice [2] , no evidence of rickets was seen when conducting this study in Dale woreda. In the present study, evidence of low dietary calcium intake and potential for poor absorption of calcium, due to phytate content in the foods, was found. No evidence for sun avoiding behaviors of mothers towards children were reported or observed during this study.
The results of this study show that dietary calcium intake of 75% of all the children was adequate, with 25% having calcium intake below the RNI. The very young children (aged 6-11 months) were more at risk of inadequate intake of dietary calcium. Studies comparing dietary calcium intake between children with and without rickets in developing countries have shown that in Nigeria, South Africa, India, Bangladesh and even Ethiopia, calcium intake by children can be very low as the predominant diets in these countries are mostly cereal-based diets that are often deficient in milk and milk products [1, 4, 5, 6, 7] . The better intake that was observed in this study was due to having more than half of the participant children (52.9%) drinking at least one small cup of skimmed milk in a day. Further, enset was a good source of calcium. The Ethiopian National Food Consumption Survey conducted in 2011 reported that "children and women have intakes below the recommended amounts of vitamins and minerals such as vitamin A, zinc, and calcium" [20] yet calcium data on intakes of these groups has not yet been published.
It should be noted that some of the most predominant foods in the study area are made with corn and include maize porridge and unleavened corn bread. These foods contain significant amounts of phytate which, when present at a molar ratio of phytate-tocalcium above 0.2, can inhibit calcium absorption [17] . Abebe et al. [21] reported that whole dried kernels of white maize and unrefined maize flour used in Southern Ethiopia contained phytate and had the lowest calcium content. Roba [22] reported that home processing in Ethiopia such as pounding and soaking can reduce phytate levels of maize. Until these processing methods become widely known and correctly practiced, dietary calcium bioavailability in these communities will be low.
Overall, the diet diversity of young children in the woreda was poor, with an average of 3.1 foods which was under the cut-off of four foods [18] . Only one-quarter of the children achieved this cut-off. In another study done in Southern Ethiopia, in areas where maize and enset were not predominate but the complementary food was primarily grains and roots, the DDS was also only 3.1, with two-thirds not achieving the minimum of four foods per day [12] . Thus, low DDS is a common problem in Southern Ethiopia. The poor DDS of the study children is reflected in underweight (WAZ score) seen in 13.5 % and stunting (HAZ score) in 22.3 %. In Ethiopia, survey data show that 44 % of children are stunted, and that 29 % are underweight, with little difference by sex, but those in the rural areas are more at risk; and survey data show 10 % of Ethiopian children are wasted [9] . The study children had a prevalence of wasting that was only half that of the country as a whole. This low prevalence may be reflective of their adequate energy intake; however, energy was consumed as high carbohydrate maize and enset, with little protein content. Further, while maize provides energy, its calcium content is low and phytate high; this had the potential to contribute to poor calcium status. Dairy products would be an ideal food to emphasize for improving calcium intake and diet diversity.
From the questionnaire, it appeared that the participant children had good sunlight exposure. Based on this, it can be concluded that as majority of the children were exposed to sunlight, they may not be at risk of vitamin D deficiency in terms of sunlight exposure. A study of older children in Southern Ethiopia showed that rural children had better vitamin D status than urban children, the latter being indoors more of the time [3] . Thus, vitamin D deficiency is possible but for rural children it is less likely. Mothers in this study had positive attitudes and practices towards sun exposure for their children as well as for themselves.
Limitations of the present study include use of a 24-hour recall dietary assessment method, which may not reflect usual intake and has social desirability and season of the year biases. The study was conducted at only one time point. Further, investigation of calcium intakes and sources for children in Ethiopia is needed.
In conclusion, the study investigated some of the major causes of nutritional rickets, for example calcium intake and potential for vitamin D deficiency caused by exposure to sunlight, in a group of very young children (6-24 months) . Measurements included determining calcium intakes, investigation of factors affecting calcium availability, and questions to mothers regarding sun exposure practices. It was found that young children in Dale Woreda, Southern Ethiopia have risk of dietary calcium inadequacy because of low intakes, and the detrimental effect of phytate on prevailing foods in the locality such as fruit and maize based complementary food. However, regarding sunlight exposure, it was not possible to determine if the participant children were likely at risk of vitamin D inadequacy. There appeared to be good exposure practices and there was no sunlight avoidance practice for majority of participant children. 
Commissioning new or replacement brachytherapy applicators can be very time consuming. Traditionally film has been used due to its unprecedented spatial resolution. Awunor et al. [1] performed a comprehensive analysis of source paths for the interstitial ring-tube applicator using Gafchromic film. Awunor et al. [2] described a multicentric audit of ring applicators for four afterloader types. Humer et al. [3] described a method in using a CCD camera mounted beneath a transparent plate affixed to the respective opened applicator. Recently efforts have been made to perform array based QA [4] [5] [6] [7] . A commercially available high resolution SRS1000 (PTW-Freiburg, Germany) ionization chamber array, OD1000 [8] has been employed to determining one source dwell position per measurement using the OD1000 [6] analogous to film measurements. In this work we employ a single time resolved dose measurement with the OD1000 to determine the entire source path for each interstitial ring applicator, see figure 1 , (Elekta AB, Sweden), available in three diameters (R26: 26mm; R30: 30mm; R34: 34mm), within a single measurement.
Mechanical (type B) uncertainties relating to the position of the PMMA jig relative to OD1000 array were estimated to be 0.2mm. Repeated measurements with different afterloaders (without dismantling set-up) and different rings are plotted in figure 4. Standard deviations of 0.6mm (R26: range -1.3 to + 1.5mm), 0.5mm (R30: range -1.4 to +1.4mm) and 0.3mm (R34: range -1.0 to +1.2mm) were determined between AL1 and AL2. The non-linear least squares fit resulted in source path diameters of (26.5 ± 0.2)mm and (29.8 ± 0.2)mm, (32.9 ± 0.2)mm and averaged geometric centre location of (0.03,0.04)mm, (0.01,0.09)mm and (-0.12,0.07)mm respectively. The standard deviation was found to be 0.06mm for R26, 0.16mm for R30 and 0.08mm R34 ring. Conclusions Our measurement technique is relatively simple and non-destructive. Initial results indicate that the novel measurement technique is robust and reproducible:a maximum deviation of 0.6mm (R26), 0.5mm (R30) and 0.3mm (R34). The OD1000 array is a versatile high resolution measurement tool, which can be used to complement existing brachytherapy QA checks. Its applicability for source path determination within brachytherapy applicators has been demostrated. Figure 4 clearly shows that the measured source path is not circular, especially R34 where the source seems be deflected by the lumen at around 225°,315° and 45°. Thus, we suggest that each institution determines the source path for each ring and compare this with the library source path of their treatment planning system (if used). Other central inserts can be devised for other applicators, and indeed other afterloader systems. This technique can be used to perform medium to long term measurements of source path position within an applicator. Although the technique is versatile it requires an high resolution 2D array and specialized measurement jig. Moreover, our technique is generally applicable to 3D measurements, but is currently limited to 2D source path determination viz. in the measurement plane, parallel to the ring plane. In the future we will extend this technique to the third dimension, perpendicular to the ring plane. 

Periodontitis is a complex inflammatory disease characterized by progressive destruction of the surrounding connective tissue and supporting alveolar bone of the teeth [1] . In adults older than 40 years, it represents the major cause of tooth loss [2] . For the most severe form of periodontitis, aggressive periodontitis (AgP), the prevalence has been reported to range between 0.1 and 15% among Caucasians, Hispanics and African Americans [3] . In European Caucasians, the prevalence for AgP has been estimated to be between 0.1 and 1% of the general population [4] . Family studies have indicated an increased prevalence of AgP among siblings with 40-50% being affected. However, the exact mode of inheritance of AgP remains unclear [3] .
Coronary heart disease (CHD) is a complex systemic disorder representing the leading cause of death worldwide [5] . As for AgP, it has been known for a long time that CHD is strongly influenced by genetic factors [6] , but it was not until recently that genetic risk loci contributing to the development of the disease were identified. An association between CHD and periodontitis has been clearly established [7, 8] . Both diseases have several environmental and behavioural risk factors in common such as education, smoking, and diabetes mellitus [8, 9] . It is assumed that, in addition to common environmental and behavioural risk factors, this association might also be based on a shared genetic background. Imbalances in immune responses and dysregulation of chronic inflammation are typical attributes of both CHD and periodontitis [10, 11] . These similarities point towards the possibility that both diseases have common underlying pathogenic mechanisms, modulated by shared genetic susceptibility loci.
In 2007, four independent GWAS which identified susceptibility loci for CHD were published [12] [13] [14] [15] . All studies reported a strong association of a region of elevated linkage disequilibrium (LD) on human chromosome 9p21.3 with CHD. The identified region is located upstream of the CDKN2A and CDKN2B genes. A subsequent meta-analysis confirmed this association [16] and the described locus on 9p21.3 now represents the best replicated genetic CHD risk locus.
Recently, Schaefer et al. (2009) [17] investigated the hypothesis that shared susceptibility loci might increase the risk for periodontitis as well as CHD. They analyzed the 9p21.3 locus for a possible association with AgP in which genetic factors play an important role [18] . Given the postulated higher penetrance of susceptibility genes in AgP compared to chronic periodontitis, this approach was assumed to increase the likelihood to detect statistically significant associations. Schaefer and co-workers [17] genotyped six tagging SNPs located within the 9p21.3 locus which they subdivided into two defined regions with three tagging SNPs in each. This approach allowed the mapping of the corresponding LD regions (rs2891168, rs1333042, rs1333048 for LD region 1; rs7044859, rs7865618, rs496892 for LD region 2). Genotyping results generated using DNA samples from patients suffering either from localized or generalized AgP were compared to data obtained using DNA samples from control individuals without AgP. Schaefer et al. (2009) [17] were able to demonstrate statistically significant associations of all tagging SNPs of LD region 1 and of rs496892 from LD region 2 with localized AgP and even stronger associations with gAgP. The SNPs rs7044859 and rs7865618 did not show any association. The study confirmed the prediction that shared susceptibility genes might be involved in the development of CHD and AgP. However, due to the limited size of the cohorts analyzed (159 generalized AgP patients versus 736 healthy controls and 146 localized AgP patients versus 368 healthy controls) that were small compared to other association studies on complex diseases, the authors emphasized the need for confirmation of the described association in further and/or larger AgP populations.
In the present study, we analyzed a cohort of 130 AgP patients and 339 appropriate periodontally healthy control individuals and genotyped the four tagging SNPs (rs2891168, rs1333042, rs1333048 and rs496892) that had been associated with AgP by Schaefer et al. (2009) [17] . Our AgP patient cohort comprised exclusively individuals with gAgP. Patients suffering from this most severe form of AgP showed the strongest association findings in the study of Schaefer and co-workers [17] , and therefore, our cohort, exhibiting a similar size as the gAgP cohort in their study, should be adequately suited to confirm their results.

The study was limited to Caucasians with a minimum of 20 teeth. In order to ensure a common Caucasian background, only subjects of German or Northern Irish ethnicity were included. The 130 gAgP cases were recruited by outpatient departments throughout Germany (n = 85) and Northern Ireland (n = 45). The gAgP cohort consisted of 53 males (41%) and 77 females (59%). The age at the time of the first diagnosis of gAgP ranged between 15 and 35 years, (inclusion criterion: age ≤ 35 years), the mean age at the time of diagnosis was 30.1 years, the median age 32 years. To be classified with gAgP where full-mouth dental radiographs were available, at least one third of all teeth had to exhibit at least 50% bone loss. In cases where no radiographs were available, a minimum of one third of all teeth had to have clinical attachment loss of ≥ 5 mm.
The 339 control subjects without AgP were also recruited from Germany (n = 225) and Northern Ireland (n = 114). The majority of the German controls (n = 172) were selected from the epidemiological Study of Health in Pomerania (SHIP) [19] . All SHIP participants received an extensive dental examination including assessment of tooth count and location, of probing depth and clinical attachment loss [20] . Information on various risk factors including smoking status, school education and diabetes were obtained through interviews as a part of the medical examination. The remaining German control individuals (n = 53) were recruited by periodontal departments throughout Germany. All Northern Irish controls were participants in the Prospective Epidemiological Study of Myocardial Infarction [21] who had a periodontal examination [22] . The control cohort consisted of 196 males (58%) and 143 females (42%). The age of the control individuals at the time of the dental examination ranged between 40 and 80 years, (exclusion criterion: age < 40 years), the mean age at the time of examination was 55 years, the median age 56.2 years. All controls had to have a minimum of 20 teeth and no clinical attachment loss of ≥ 5 mm. All cases and controls gave their written informed consent for the study. The study was approved by the local institutional review board (Ethics Commission of the Ernst Moritz Arndt University Greifswald, Medical Faculty, registration number BB 05/07). In the current work, the described study population is subsequently referred to as the "Greifswald cohort".
Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples using the QIAamp DNA blood mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer's instruction. Purity and concentration of the DNA was determined using a NanoDrop® ND-1000 UV-Vis Spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, USA), and the integrity of each DNA preparation was verified by gel electrophoresis on 0.8% Agarose-1 × TBE gels stained with ethidium bromide.
Genotyping was performed using an Applied Biosystems 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System and the TaqMan Genotyping System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). All TaqMan assays used in this study were purchased from Applied Biosystems (Darmstadt, Germany) and performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Genotypes were generated by automatic calling using the SDS 2.3 software (Applied Biosystems). All genotypes were furthermore reviewed manually.
Unadjusted and adjusted case-control analysis was performed using PLINK v1.06 [23] . We assessed the significance of associations between genotypes and gAgP using logistic regression. The adjusted model was computed by multiple logistic regression analysis adjusting for individual's gender and smoking status. Each individual was classified as never, former or current smoker based on self-reported or interview based information. The smoking status was addressed in the regression model by implementing two dummy variables indicating former and current smoking, with never smokers as the reference. Finally, three covariates were added for adjustment: one for gender and two coding the smoking status.
Meta-analysis was performed in R v2.8.0 http://www.rproject.org using a sample size weighted fixed effect model. To perform the appropriate analyses, we matched the effect alleles of the Greifswald cohort to the effect allele of Schaefer and co-workers (2009) [17] . Additional software and tools used for analyses included Haploview [24] , UCSC genome browser http://genome. ucsc.edu, HapMap http://www.hapmap.org and Medline.
Minor allele frequencies of the analyzed SNPs rs2891168, rs1333042, rs1333048, and rs496892
Allele frequencies for the minor alleles of all four SNPs genotyped in this study were around 50% (see Table 1 ). For SNPs rs2891168, rs1333042, and rs1333048 the minor alleles (G, G, and C, respectively) were the same as described by Schaefer and co-workers (2009) [17] . The effect allele of rs496892 was around 50% in our study as well as in the study of Schaefer and co-workers (2009) (A to G) [1] . All four analyzed SNPs were found to be in Hardy-Weinberg-Equilibrium (HWE) in our cohort (p HWE > 0.01) ( Table 2) .
Analysis for Association with gAgP using unadjusted SNP data Dominant, recessive, and multiplicative models were used to test for associations with gAgP in both unadjusted and adjusted SNP data. The results for the unadjusted analyses are summarized in Table 3 . Without adjustment, rs2891168 was significantly associated with gAgP in a dominant and a multiplicative model, 
In the next step, analyses were adjusted for the covariates gender and smoking. Using the multiplicative model, the SNPs rs1333048 and rs496892 exhibited a statistically significant association with gAgP, whereas in the dominant model, only rs2891168 and rs496892 demonstrated significant associations. Again, as was the case with the unadjusted data, rs1333042 did not show significant association with gAgP in any of the three models. Furthermore, in the recessive model, none of the four SNPs was significantly associated with gAgP (Table 3) .
Taken together, two of the SNPs of the LD region 1, (rs2891168 and rs1333048) demonstrated significant association with gAgP in the multiplicative model, whereas only rs2891168 was also significantly associated in the dominant model. The association of rs2891168 with gAgP was stronger in the dominant than the multiplicative model, using both unadjusted data [23] . Values are given before and after adjustment for the covariates smoking and gender. The parameters for the genetic models producing the strongest significant associations are given in boldface for each SNP for adjusted as well as unadjusted analyses.
the multiplicative and in the dominant model using unadjusted as well as adjusted data, with the association stronger in both cases when the multiplicative model was used (Table 3) .
Meta-Analysis for Association with gAgP using all available data for the SNPs rs2891168, rs1333042, rs1333048, and rs496892
To maximize the statistical power of the association analyses, we finally performed a meta-analysis for the SNPs rs2891168, rs1333042, rs1333048, and rs496892 combining our adjusted data with those from Schaefer and co-workers (2009) [17] for multiplicative, recessive, and dominant models. In the multiplicative model, all four tested SNPs were significantly associated with gAgP, even after Bonferroni correction (see Table 4 ). In this model, rs1333048 exhibited the strongest association with p = 1.09 × 10 -03 . For all four SNPs, the metaanalysis produced lower p-values in the multiplicative model compared to the results obtained using the genotyping data from the two single cohorts. Using a recessive model in the meta-analysis, only the SNPs representing LD region 1 (rs2891168, rs1333042, rs1333048) were significantly associated with gAgP, whereas rs496892 representing LD region 2 did not fall below the threshold of significance. As in the case of the multiplicative model, rs1333048 showed the strongest association with gAgP with p = 9.97 × 10 -04 . However, whereas in the multiplicative model the p-values produced in the meta-analysis were lower than those obtained with the two single cohorts, this was not the case in the recessive one: here, the p-values from the meta-analysis, while being predominantly lower compared to those obtained solely with the Greifswald cohort, were higher than the values obtained when only the Schaefer et al. cohort was used. Using a dominant model in the meta-analysis, only rs496892 representing LD region 2 exhibited significant association after Bonferroni correction with p = 1.24 × 10 -02 , with this value being lower than those obtained using the two single cohorts (p = 4.94 × 10 -02 and p = 2.60 × 10 -02 for the Greifswald and the Schaefer et al. cohort [17] , respectively).
In summary, the lowest p-values in total were obtained for rs2891168, rs1333042, and rs496892 when the multiplicative model was used, and in the case of rs1333048, the value was only marginally lower in the recessive (p = 9.97 × 10 -04 ) as compared to the multiplicative model (p = 1.09 × 10 -03 ). Therefore, the multiplicative model generated the most consistent results and appeared to be the most plausible model for the association of all four tested SNPs with gAgP.
The main finding of the current study was the replication of statistically significant associations between three defined SNPs located on human chromosome 9p21.3 and gAgP. The locus on chromosome 9p21.3, which had Association statistics are shown for the Greifswald total cohort consisting of cases affected with gAgP and control subjects unaffected by gAgP and for the gAgP cases and the corresponding controls described in Schaefer et al. (2009) [17] . P: p-values obtained by logistic regression using PLINK; n: Number of individuals in the corresponding cohorts; P Meta-Analysis and P (BON) Meta-Analysis: p-values of the Meta-Analyses using z statistics before and after Bonferroni correction. Values are given after adjustment for the covariates smoking and gender. The parameters for the genetic models producing the strongest significant associations are given in boldface for each SNP before and after Bonferroni correction.
previously been shown to be associated with CHD, was recently associated with gAgP ( Figure 1 ) [17] . The replication analysis in our independent cohort, consisting of 130 gAgP patients and 339 periodontally healthy control subjects without gAgP, strengthened the findings of Schaefer et al. (2009) [17] . This result corroborates the idea that the chromosomal locus on 9p21.3 may represent one of the postulated genetic links between CHD and periodontitis. Furthermore, combining the results of Schaefer et al. and our own results in a meta-analysis resulted in an improved statistical power due to the increase in the total number of analyzed individuals.
The results of this meta-analysis favour a multiplicative model of inheritance for the genetic variant that is associated with gAgP. Detailed functional analyses of the 9p21.3 region have been completed (Figure 2 ) to determine the molecular mechanisms underlying the increased risk for CHD [25, 26] . Within this locus, the non-coding ANRIL RNA overlaps with the upstream promoter region of the genes CDKN2A and ARF, whereby ARF shares two exons with CDKN2A, and the complete sequence of the CDKN2B gene. While CDKN2A, ARF, and CDKN2B are transcribed in the same direction, ANRIL is transcribed in the opposite direction (Figure 2 ). Both CDKN2A and CDKN2B encode cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, namely p16
INK4a and p15 INK4b . The gene product of ARF is able to bind and sequester MDM1, a protein responsible for the degradation of p53, and so acts as a stabilizer of the tumor suppressor protein p53. Therefore, these three genes specify proteins involved in cell cycle inhibition. Liu et al. (2009) [26] analyzed the expression of several transcripts specified by the 9p21.3 region in purified peripheral blood T-cells (PBTL) from 170 healthy donors. These samples were genotyped for six selected disease-related SNPs spanning the locus. The PBTL of individuals that harbored a common SNP (rs10757278) had significantly reduced expression of all transcripts encoded by the 9p21.3 region, namely CDKN2A, CDKN2B, ARF and ANRIL. The SNP (rs10757278) has been associated with an increased risk of CHD, stroke and aortic aneurysm and is located downstream of the 3′-end of ANRIL (Figure 2) . Therefore, genotypes of rs10757278 which are associated with an increased risk of atherosclerotic diseases are also associated with a decreased expression of genes CDKN2A, CDKN2B and ARF, which encode products with known anti-proliferative functions, and, in addition, with a reduced expression of ANRIL itself [26] . Based on their findings, Liu and co-workers suggested a potentially important role for cell cycle inhibitors in atherosclerotic disease. According to a regulation model derived from these results, a polymorphic cis-regulatory element in close linkage disequilibrium with rs10757278 influences the expression of CDKN2A, CDKN2B and ARF which are located approximately 120 kb from this SNP as well as of ANRIL whose 3′-end is located in the direct neighborhood of rs10757278 and which spans several other risk-associated SNPs (Figure 2) . Regulation of CDKN2A, CDKN2B and ARF could be directly mediated by the postulated polymorphic cis-regulatory element or, as ANRIL overlaps with the upstream region of the CDKN2A and ARF genes and the complete sequence of CDKN2B, indirectly via ANRIL [26] .
Jarinova and co-workers (2009) [25] performed an even more detailed functional analysis of the 9p21.3 region in an attempt to identify the molecular mechanisms responsible for the increased risk for CHD. It turned out that the risk haplotype can finally be reduced to one single nucleotide variation, namely rs1333045, which seems to be responsible for an increased expression of the short splicing variants of the ANRIL regulatory RNA in homozygous carriers of the risk allele as compared to carriers Figure 1 Linkage disequilibrium (LD) map for the SNPs genotyped in this study. The LD region 1 as described by Schaefer et al. (2009) [17] is represented by the three SNPs rs2891168, rs1333042, and rs1333048. The LD region 2 is represented by SNP rs496892. The derived LD block structure is shown for the Greifswald case-control cohort (n = 469) described in this study. Numbers represent pair wise percent R of the non-risk allele, whereas the long ANRIL variant is present in decreased amounts [25] . Jarinova and co-workers were able to demonstrate a positive correlation between the long splicing variant of ANRIL and the amount of CDKN2A and CDKN2B specific mRNA. On the other hand, the amount of CDKN2A and CDKN2B specific mRNA is reduced in the homozygous carriers of the risk allele who exhibited decreased amounts of the long ANRIL variant and increased amounts of the short splicing variants. The authors hypothesized that the SNP (s), such as rs1333045, within the 9p21.3 locus may function as a molecular switch resulting in reciprocal changes in expression levels of the short and long ANRIL transcripts. According to this model, the risk allele causes increased amounts of short ANRIL variants, which in turn results in reduced expression of CDKN2A and CDKN2B (and ARF). As CDKN2A, CDKN2B and ARF encode proteins involved in negative cell cycle regulation their down-regulation could be predicted to promote a pro-proliferative phenotype. Indeed, genome-wide expression profiling performed by Jarinova and co-workers (2009) [25] using whole-blood RNA demonstrated upregulation of gene sets modulating cellular proliferation in homozygous carriers of the risk allele. Of particular importance in the context of gAgP, gene sets relevant to inflammation, including TNF/MAP kinase pathway signaling in activated T-cells and interferon response genes turned out to be differentially expressed. It is therefore reasonable to suggest that the same molecular mechanisms involving the SNP rs1333045 that result in an increased risk for CHD could also mediate the increased risk for gAgP.
The SNPs rs1333045 and rs10757278, which were extensively investigated [25, 26] , are located within the LD region 1 between rs2891168 and rs1333048 that have been genotyped in the current study (Figure 2) . The chromosomal order of the three SNPs in the LD region 1 which were genotyped in our study (rs2891168, rs1333042, and rs1333048) as well as rs1333045 and rs10757278 and the corresponding R 2 values as calculated using the HAPMAP data are shown in Figure 3 . The high values clearly confirm the LD structure of the region. Using the available HAPMAP data for these five SNPs, a haplotype structure which also considers the newly identified causative SNP rs1333045 and rs10757278 was calculated (Table 5) . Altogether six haplotypes were obtained, and two (AATAA and GGCGC) accounted for more than 92% of all haplotypes detected at this locus according to the HAPMAP data. Three of these (GGCGC, AACAA, and AACGC), which together amounted to 53.5% of all haplotypes identified, exhibit the risk allele C of the putative causative SNP rs1333045. Obviously, the risk allele is quite frequent in the Caucasian population.
The number of gAgP cases in our case-control cohort was similar to that analyzed by Schaefer and co-workers (n = 130 versus n = 159), but the number of control individuals was clearly smaller in our cohort (n = 339 versus n = 736). However, the information about the periodontal condition of the control subjects described as "free of periodontitis" in the cohort of Schaefer and Figure 2 Transcriptional map of the human 9p21.3 locus associated with CHD and gAgP. The transcripts specifying CDKN2A, CDKN2B, ARF, and ANRIL are shown as well as the four SNPs tested in this study (rs496892, rs2891168, rs1333042, rs1333048) and the two SNPs rs10757278 and 1333045 analyzed extensively in the studies of [26] and [25] , respectively (illustration adopted from [26] and modified, by courtesy of Norman E. Sharpless).
co-workers was based solely on self-report of their oral health status. In contrast, our control subjects were classified to be free of even low levels of periodontitis based on an extensive dental examination. Therefore, the more stringent ascertainment criteria for inclusion in our control cohort should compensate for the smaller number of individuals.
Most importantly, the combination of our genotyping results with those from Schaefer and co-workers in a meta-analysis for the SNPs rs2891168, rs1333042, rs1333048, and rs496892 produced lower p-values as compared to the results of both the individual studies in the multiplicative model. It seems reasonable to propose a multiplicative model for the whole locus covering both LD regions, substantiating the earlier assumption of Schaefer and co-workers that the underlying genetic model might be "somewhere between the recessive and the multiplicative one" [17] .
The association data support the hypothesis which predicts increased susceptibility for the development of gAgP determined by the risk haplotype associated with a pronounced general pro-proliferative and pro-inflammatory phenotype resulting from decreased expression of the three cell-cycle inhibitor encoding genes CDKN2A, ARF and CDKN2B.
The chromosomal region 9p21.3 probably does not represent the sole susceptibility locus for the development of gAgP. The predicted risk haplotypes, as calculated from the CEU HAPMAP data, amount to a total frequency of 53.5%, which is surprisingly high in view of the known low prevalence rate of gAgP. Therefore, in addition to the influence of lifestyle factors, it can be speculated that further genetic loci for gAgP exist. These loci might exhibit stronger gene related effects in their contribution to the increased risk for the development of gAgP. A hypothesis-free Genome-wide Association Study (GWAS) could represent the method of choice to identify such predicted additional gAgP susceptibility genes. As a clinical implication of the verified association between gAgP and the chromosomal region 9p21.3 that has been clearly associated with CHD in earlier studies, it may be worth informing AgP patients routinely of a possible increased risk of CHD.
In conclusion, using an independent case-control cohort, we positively replicated the finding of an association between the chromosomal region 9p21.3 and gAgP which was first described by Schaefer and coworkers [17] . This result strengthens support for the hypothesis that shared susceptibility genes within this chromosomal locus might be involved in the pathogenesis of both CHD and gAgP. The five SNPs rs2891168, rs1333042, rs1333045, rs10757278, and rs1333048 were used to determine the minimal number of haplotypes and the corresponding frequencies present in LD region 1 as derived from the HAPMAP data set. The postulated causative C residue within the three putative risk haplotypes is shown in boldface.
Ministry of the Federal State Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. The PRIME study is supported by a grant from the Northern Ireland NHS Research and Development Fund.
Nat. Inst. of Health, Bethesda, Md. (introduced by Robert W. Miller). The causes of non-directional asymmetry of paired organs has been referred to as developmental 'noise' (WADDINGTON, G. H.: The Strategy of the genes [Allen and Unwin 1957] ). Thus the level of asymmetry is inversely correlated to the degree of developmental stability.
We report here a greater asymmetry in the atd angle of the palmer dermatoglyphics and the maximum buccal-lingual diameter of the lower first molars of children affected with familial cleft lip deleft palate. This increased asymmetry was not present in the normal sibs or parents of the affected children. Neither was it present in propositi and families of sporadic cleft lip ± cleft palate or isolated cleft palate. Sufficient data are not available to determine the asymmetry of familial cleft palate without cleft lip. A total of 88 families with at least one member affected with an oral cleft and 82 families with no cleft history were examined.
The action of polygenes with a quasi-continuous distribution may be consistent with this new observation. Consideration of such mechanisms may offer some explanation for the diversity of results from investigations seeking to identify characteristic dermatoglyphic and dental anomalies in patients with congenital malformations. (SPR) (introduced by Laurence Finberg). Kinky Hair Disease, first described by MENKES in 1962 as an X-linked recessive neurodegenerative disorder, may represent an abnormality of lipid metabolism. Studies have been carried out on a 16-monthold male patient showing the clinical features of: 1. scant, pale, lacklustre, kinky hair which microscopically revealed twisting about their axes (pili torti), a rather even almost sine wave variability in the diameter of the hair shaft (monilethrix) and many broken hair shafts (trichorrhexis nodosa); 2. slow growth and weight gain from birth; 3. micrognathia and high arched palate; 4. a clear history of marked decline in mental development; 5. onset of severe focal and generalized major and minor motor seizures; 6. spasticity with quadriparesis, clenched fists, opisthotonos and scissoring.
Biochemical studies show: 1. a depressed tocopherol content of the serum; 2. a normal amino acid composition of the hair, serum and urine; 3. an abnormal pattern of autofluorescence of the hair. Other patients at autopsy have shown this same abnormal fluorescence of their Purkinje cell axons. Together with previously described alterations in the lipid composition of the brain (O'BRIEN, 1966) Pediat. 67: 617 [1965] ). The clinical and pathological findings in these 9 patients suggest that this disorder constitutes a clinical entity, for which, in view of the unknown pathogenesis, the descriptive term cerebro-hepato-renal syndrome is proposed. No detectable chromosomal or metabolic abnormality, or an exogenous causative factor has been detected.
The 5 affected individuals, of normal, nonconsanguineous parents of Alsacian extraction, had a mean birth weight of 2493 g at 37-40 weeks gestation and died at 4, 2, 14, 1/7 and 20 weeks respectively. They had 8 normal sibs (5 males, 3 females). CANN, Stanford Univ. Sch. of Med., Palo Alto, Cal. Although the frequency of ahaptoglobinemia in the newborn has been determined in Caucasians, little is known about the frequency of this condition in other populations. We are studying ahaptoglobinemia in cord blood specimens from 314 infants born in Puerto Rico, a sample from a heterogeneous population: Caucasian, Negro and mulatto. The frequency of ahaptoglobinemia, as defined by lack of a haptoglobin pattern on starch gel electrophoresis, was found to be 0.777 in 94 samples of the Puerto Rican newborn group studied to date. When this result was compared to the frequencies found in an American-USA (0.873), two southern Italian (0.809 and 0.800) and two Scandinavian (0.767 and 0.900) newborn populations, significant heterogeneity was found in the data (X 2 ( 5 ) = 16.612). Data from the American (USA) and one of the Scandinavian populations account for the heterogeneity ; our data do not differ from those of the remaining three Caucasian populations. Ahaptoglobinemia in the Puerto Rican sample was analyzed by studying the effects of several variables. The frequency of ahaptoglobinemia was not affected by sex of the child, birth weight and race of the mother. Parity did not

is not consistently high. By varying the initial plating density, we observed that the percentage of cells that differentiate into definitive endoderm (Fig. 1a) can range from 25% to 80% (Fig. 1b  and Supplementary Fig. 1a,b) , with the number of Sox17 + cells varying by as much as sevenfold (Supplementary Fig. 1c ). Cells were more responsive to differentiation signals if the differentiation protocol began with cells plated at a high density. We hypothesized that promoting contact-mediated growth inhibition in hESCs, as in high-density cultures, might improve their response to differentiation signals.
DMSO treatment has been shown to enhance contact inhibition and reversibly arrest cells in early G1 in other cultured cell lines [12] [13] [14] [15] . In addition, pleiotropic effects of DMSO, including on the spontaneous differentiation of embryoid bodies, have been noted in various cultured cell types 16, 17 .
We assessed the effects of DMSO treatment on the differentiation potential of low-and high-density HUES8 cultures. The cultures were treated with 1% or 2% DMSO for 24 h and subsequently induced to differentiate into definitive endoderm. In low-density cultures, exposure to DMSO doubled responsiveness to differentiation signals ( Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1d ), increasing the percentage of Sox17 + cells from ~25% to 50%. DMSO treatment of high-density HUES8 cultures resulted in high efficiencies comparable to those of control cultures (Fig. 1b) .
Next we investigated the effect of DMSO treatment on HUES6, a cell line with low propensity to make definitive endoderm even at high density 1, 2 (Fig. 1c) . Treatment of HUES6 cells with 2% DMSO for 24 h before the onset of differentiation increased Sox17 + cells from ~20% to 50% ( Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 1e ). The H1 cell line is also predicted to have one of the lowest propensities to differentiate toward the endodermal germ layer 2 ; DMSO treatment induced ~90% of H1 cells to become Sox17 + definitive endoderm (Supplementary Figs. 2c and 3a,b) . In all three lines, cells that failed to differentiate retained expression of pluripotency markers under control and DMSO conditions (Supplementary Fig. 2 ).
Next we assessed whether an initial DMSO treatment could improve terminal differentiation in HUES6. A 24-h DMSO treatment substantially improved HUES6 differentiation into Pdx1 + pancreatic progenitors (~60%, Fig. 1d ) and terminally differentiated hormone-expressing C-peptide + cells to levels similar to those seen for the high-propensity HUES8 cell line 11 ( Supplementary Fig. 1f ). Other terminal cell types induced by this protocol were not assessed.
HUES6 is also predicted to be impaired in its ability to differentiate into the ectodermal (neural) and mesodermal lineages 1 We describe a method to help overcome restrictions on the differentiation propensities of human pluripotent stem cells. culturing pluripotent stem cells in dimethylsulfoxide (dmso) activates the retinoblastoma protein, increases the proportion of cells in the early G1 phase of the cell cycle and, in more than 25 embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cell lines, improves directed differentiation into multiple lineages. dmso treatment also improves differentiation into terminal cell types in several cell lines.
The differentiation potential of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) varies substantially across cell lines. Certain cell lines have a higher capacity to differentiate into derivatives of some germ layers 1, 2 . Based on differences in gene expression and DNA methylation profiles, a 'lineage scorecard' has been described that predicts the differentiation potential of 32 hESC and hiPSC lines 2 . This has led to the view that particular cell lines need to be selected to achieve efficient differentiation to a lineage of choice.
We investigated the role of the cell cycle on differentiation potential and present a new perspective, challenging the view that only some human pluripotent stem cell lines are suitable for differentiation into particular lineages. hESC and hiPSC lines have a cellcycle structure characterized by an abbreviated G1 gap phase and minimal checkpoint controls [3] [4] [5] [6] . Similarly, in early development in vivo, the embryonic cell cycle also has a truncated G1 phase during the period when rapid cell division occurs and decisions about fate and differentiation are held back [7] [8] [9] [10] . These findings suggest that the absence of an early G1 phase is associated with self-renewal and that the presence of this phase is associated with differentiation and cell fate changes. This led us to investigate whether the presence of an early G1 phase and its associated checkpoint controls are important for directed differentiation of pluripotent cell lines.
We began our analysis by investigating the hESC line HUES8. HUES8 has one of the highest propensities for differentiation to Sox17 + definitive endoderm cells 1, 11 , yet its differentiation Supplementary Fig. 6 ), enhancing functionality in a cell line previously considered incompetent 2 .
We evaluated the effects of an initial DMSO treatment on terminal differentiation in two additional contexts. In low-density cultures, HUES8 cells that had differentiated into definitive endoderm failed to differentiate further into Pdx1 + cells, and cell survival was substantially compromised (Fig. 1d,e ). An initial 24-h DMSO treatment enhanced pancreatic differentiation in these low-density cultures, yielding 60% Pdx1 + cells, comparable to the efficiency of high-density cultures ( Fig. 1d-f ). DMSO treatment of low-density HUES8 cultures also promoted further terminal differentiation into C-peptide + and glucagon + endocrine cells (Supplementary Fig. 7) .
Because Pdx1 + cells may be a source for cell replacement therapy for diabetes [18] [19] [20] , we assessed the effects of DMSO in an induced pluripotent stem cell line derived from a type 1 diabetic subject (DiPS). Although DiPS control cultures efficiently (~60%) differentiated toward definitive endoderm, further differentiation to Pdx1 + cells was inefficient (0.4%) even at high density. An initial 24-h DMSO treatment increased differentiation to Pdx1 + cells by 100-fold, from 0.4% to 44% (Fig. 1d,g ).
We tested the effect of DMSO on differentiation across lineages in more than 25 other human pluripotent cell lines, including those used to generate the lineage scorecard 2 . DMSO treatment enhanced directed differentiation ( Fig. 2a) into cells of all three germ layers (Fig. 2b,c 20% ± 6% 23% ± 6% 50% ± 1% 61% ± 5% 28% ± 0.05% 54% ± 3% 60% ± 0.5% Table 1 ) and in total yield of cells (Supplementary Table 2 ). The effects of DMSO were particularly large in poorly performing cell lines ( Supplementary  Fig. 8a ). For instance, HUES1 is predicted to have low differentiation potential for ectoderm as a result of suppressed expression of ectodermal-related genes 2 . DMSO treatment raised the ectodermal differentiation potential of HUES1 from 28% to 93% ( Supplementary  Fig. 8b,c and Supplementary Table 1) . Hence, DMSO treatment raises the minimum differentiation potential across all germ layers and reduces the probability of a very low differentiation rate.
The average cycling times of hESC and hiPSC lines range from ~24 to 48 h (refs. 21, 22) . Because growth inhibition is associated with cell cycling time, we assessed DMSO effects on differentiation following a 24-or 48-h treatment. We observed that extending treatment from 24 to 48 h improved differentiation for several cell lines and that optimizing the DMSO treatment could result in 80%-90% differentiation in some cases (Supplementary Fig. 9 ).
In several of the cell lines tested, we observed that DMSO treatment positively affected differentiation further down the endocrine lineage, resulting in enhanced induction of Pdx1 + pancreatic progenitor cells (Supplementary Fig. 10a ). Although the effect varied depending on the line, an initial 24-h DMSO treatment enhanced Pdx1 + cell induction on average by 15-fold and 5-fold in hESC and hiPSC lines, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 10b,c) . Notably, in cell lines with high differentiation efficiencies to Sox17 + definitive endoderm, DMSO improved differentiation into Pdx1 + cells despite having modest impacts at the initial stages of differentiation. Similarly, in the H1 cell line, DMSO treatment promoted generation of terminally differentiated endocrine cells (Supplementary Fig. 3c,d ) to levels comparable to those reported for high-propensity cell lines 18, 19 .
In addition to these persistent effects, preliminary data show that DMSO treatment can improve functionality after transplantation in vivo. Transplantation of control and DMSO-pretreated HUES8 pancreatic progenitor cells under the kidney capsule of SCID-Beige mice showed that an initial 24-h DMSO treatment (prior to directed differentiation in vitro) improved insulin secretion in response to glucose stimulation (data not shown).
We investigated the mechanisms by which DMSO treatment enhances the response of pluripotent stem cells to differentiation signals (Fig. 3) . We focused on the HUES6 line for this analysis because it exhibited the greatest improvements in differentiation potential. Consistent with reports in other tissue culture systems [12] [13] [14] [15] , flow cytometry analysis of propidium iodide-stained HUES6 cells showed that a 24-h 2% DMSO treatment almost doubled the proportion of cells in G1 (Fig. 3a) . To discriminate between cells in early and late G1, we also assessed the presence of the active hypophosphorylated retinoblastoma (Rb) protein, a marker of the early G1 phase 9, 23 . DMSO treatment was associated with a fourfold increase in immunofluorescence reactivity of hypophosphorylated Rb (Fig. 3b) and substantially reduced levels of the phosphorylated and hyperphosphorylated forms of the Rb protein (Fig. 3c,d) . Similarly, for HUES8 cells, higher initial plating density was associated with an increased proportion of cells in G1 (Fig. 3f) and reduced levels of the phosphorylated and hyperphosphorylated forms of the Rb protein (Fig. 3g) .
We performed live imaging of HUES6 cells during a 24-h DMSO treatment and subsequent release. DMSO-treated cultures had a slow growth rate and subsequently reached the same degree of confluence as control cultures upon release from DMSO treatment (Supplementary Fig. 11 ). When cell contact was disrupted, DMSO pretreatment no longer had an impact on differentiation (Fig. 3e) , a result analogous to observations in other cell types in which loss of cell-to-cell contact is associated with inactivation of Rb and impaired differentiation 24 . Prolonged or permanent cell-cycle arrest also inhibited DMSOenhanced differentiation potential (Supplementary Fig. 12) , suggesting that opposing mechanisms may govern spontaneous extraembryonic differentiation 25, 26 and directed differentiation of pluripotent stem cells.
In summary, the results presented here challenge the view that only some human pluripotent stem cell lines are suitable for differentiation into particular lineages. Culturing hESCs and hiPSCs in DMSO for a brief period (24-48 h) can improve the ability of several cell lines to differentiate into the desired lineage. This method also enhances the prospects of using patient-specific 17 , DMSO concentrations of 1%-2% did not have any toxic effects on hESCs and hiPSCs. Moreover, the effects of an initial DMSO treatment persist to improve functionality. Although further work is needed to characterize the mechanism through which DMSO operates, our analysis suggests that DMSO likely improves differentiation by regulating Rb and the pluripotent cell cycle. Rb plays a key role in a variety of cellular processes, including tumorigenesis, senescence, apoptosis, DNA damage and repair, and genetic stability 9, 10, [27] [28] [29] . Regulation of Rb activity using DMSO could have applications in many settings. methods Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper.
potential. With the Cellomics high-content screening system, 30 10× fields per well were acquired and quantified. Cells labeled by antibody staining and total cell number (based on DAPI nuclei staining) were quantified to obtain percentages of target cell types. according to the manufacturer's instructions. cDNA (100-120 ng) was amplified by PCR using TaqMan Universal Master Mix and TaqMan Gene Expression assays that were preloaded onto custom TaqMan arrays (Applied Biosystems). Data were analyzed using sequence detection software (Applied Biosystems) and normalized to undifferentiated hESCs using the ∆∆Ct method. A list of primers (Applied Biosystems) is provided in ref. 36 .
Live-cell imaging. Phase-contrast imaging of cultures undergoing a 24-h DMSO treatment followed by a 24-h release in hESC maintenance medium was acquired using the IncuCyte live-cell imaging system.
Cell-cycle analysis. Cells were trypsinized and fixed in 100% EtOH for 30 min on ice, treated with RNase A (100 µg/ml, Qiagen) and stained with propidium iodide (PI; 50 µg/ml, Invitrogen) in 0.1% Triton X-100 for at least 30 min. Cells were assessed on the BD Biosciences LSRII FACS flow cytometer and analyzed using the FlowJo software.
Western blot analysis. Cells were lysed using the RIPA Lysis Buffer (Santa Cruz). Proteins were separated by 7.5% SDS-PAGE (Bio-Rad) and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad). The membranes were blocked in 5% skim milk in 0.1% Triton X-100 for 1 h at room temperature and then incubated with the following primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C: G3-245 (ppRb, 1:1,000, BD Pharmingen), Phospho-Rb-Ser780 (1:200, Cell Signaling), Phospho-Rb-Ser795 (1:200, Cell Signaling), PhosphoRb-Ser807/811 (1:200, Cell Signaling), 4H1 (total Rb, 1:1,000, Cell Signaling or GAPDH (1:5,000, Abcam) as the loading control. After washing, the membranes were incubated with secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature: anti-mouse HRP (1:1,000, Cell Signaling) or anti-rabbit HRP (1:1,000, Cell Signaling), and then incubated in Chemiluminescent HRP substrate (Millipore) for signal detection and development.
Statistical analysis. Means and s.e.m. were determined for the above variables. For statistical comparisons, these values were subjected to unpaired or paired (across multiple cell lines) two-tailed Student's t-tests. P values ≤0.05 were considered significant.
P ropionate and polypropionate subunits are ubiquitous structural motifs found in many polyketide natural products possessing diverse biological properties. 1 Stereocontrolled synthesis of such structural motifs has attracted considerable interest in the synthetic community due to the challenges that arise from the inherent architectural complexity of many bioactive natural products.
2 Multicomponent anion relay chemistry (ARC), a highly effective, stereocontrolled fragment union process pioneered in our laboratory, 3 holds significant promise for the rapid construction of diverse polyketide natural products.
Over the past decade, we have reported extensive studies in the area of fragment union. 4 In the area of through-space anion relay chemistry (ARC) (i.e., negative charge migration), we exploited [1,n] -Brook rearrangements that have led to the discovery of Type I and Type II ARC union tactics ( Figure 1) . 5 In Type I ARC, an anion is first generated on linchpin 1 facilitated by an anion-stabilizing group (ASG, e.g., dithiane), which adds to an epoxide to form an alkoxide (2). Upon Brook rearrangement, the negative charge is relayed back to the originating carbon, which is then terminated with either the same electrophile (i.e., homocoupling) or a different electrophile (i.e., heterocoupling) to deliver the three-component adduct 3. In Type II ARC, an external nucleophile is first added to a bifunctional linchpin (4) to generate alkoxide 5, which upon triggering the Brook rearrangement, either by change in solvent polarity, temperature, and/or counterion, the negative charge is then transferred to a new carbon site.
5b Subsequent trapping with an electrophile furnishes the three-component adduct 6. Linchpins can also be added in iterative fashion to form multicomponent adducts such as 8 via a process not dissimilar to living polymerization. 6 Given the considerable potential of the multicomponent ARC tactic in assembling diverse molecular scaffolds with precise stereocontrol, we initiated a program to focus on the design, synthesis, and validation of a new aldehyde linchpin 9 that would enable the construction of propionate-containing natural products exploiting the Type II ARC tactic. The proposed Type II ARC tactic with linchpin 9 is depicted in Figure 2A . Here, addition of an external nucleophile to the aldehyde (9) would proceed under Felkin−Anh control 7 to generate syn-alkoxide 10, which would then undergo 1,4-Brook rearrangement, triggered by the addition of a polar additive (i.e., HMPA), to form anionic dithiane 11. Termination with an electrophile would deliver the three-component adduct 12, which upon reductive dithiane removal would reveal a methylene group (13) or upon dithiane hydrolysis a carbonyl group (14) for further functionalization.
To explore this scenario, we first constructed the prospective racemic aldehyde linchpin 9 from 2-methyl-1,3-propanediol 15 ( Figure 2B ). Monoprotection of the diol with trityl chloride followed by oxidation of the free alcohol led to the corresponding aldehyde, which upon treatment with 1,3-propanedithiol and BF 3 ·Et 2 O furnished dithiane 16 with concomitant removal of the trityl group. Subsequent C-silylation with TMSCl/n-BuLi followed by Parikh−Doering oxidation of the free alcohol delivered the desired linchpin 9. This linchpin was also prepared in highly enantiomerically enriched fashion starting from either commercially available Roche ester (vide infra).
With the prospective linchpin in hand, we turned to the proposed Type II ARC reaction. We first investigated n-BuLi and allyl bromide as the initiating nucleophile and terminating electrophile, respectively. After preliminary screenings, we discovered that addition of n-BuLi to the linchpin in Et 2 O at −78°C, followed by introduction of allyl bromide and HMPA in Et 2 O and warming of the reaction mixture to ambient temperature over 4 h, furnished the desired three-component adduct 17 as a single syn-diastereomer (vide infra) in 74% yield after acid-mediated removal of the TMS group (Table 1 , entry 1). The use of Et 2 O as the reaction solvent for the initial nucleophilic addition proved critical, since performing the reaction in THF leads to premature Brook rearrangement, even at low temperature (not shown).
Having established the optimal reaction conditions, a brief substrate scope study was performed. As illustrated in Table 1 , phenyl-, alkynyl-, and allyllithium, as well as lithiated 2-methyl-1,3-dithiane all proved viable initiating nucleophiles, with the reactions proceeding to deliver the three-component adducts as single syn-diastereomers in moderate to good yields (entries 2− 5). A range of electrophiles including benzaldehyde, (R)-1,2-epoxybutane, (S)-epichlorohydrin, and (R)-glycidol benzyl ether (entries 6−9) readily participated as electrophiles in the ARC reactions to furnished the corresponding three-component adducts also in good yield with excellent syn-selectivity as expected. The relative stereochemistry of the three-component adduct 21 (entry 5) was confirmed by single-crystal X-ray diffraction and that of the other congeners was assigned by analogy. Further confirmation was obtained by Mosher ester analysis 8 of a derivatized pre-Brook alcohol (see the Supporting Information).
Further validation of the new protocol as a viable synthetic tactic logically required the synthesis of both enantiomers of 9. To this end, (+)-9 was prepared first from known compound (−)-16, the latter constructed from commercially available (R)-Roche ester (−)-26 in four steps (Figure 3) . 9 Silylation at the dithiane 2-position followed by Parikh−Doering oxidation furnished aldehyde linchpin (+)-9 in 66% yield over two steps. Importantly, following the oxidation step, removal of excess triethylamine from the crude reaction mixture employing satd aq CuSO 4 proved critical in preserving the optical purity of the linchpin. The enantiomer (−)-9 was then prepared in a similar fashion. Pleasingly, X-ray quality crystals were obtained in this case. Both series were carried out on multigram scale; chiral phase With an effective bifunctional linchpin for Type II ARC in hand, we turned to demonstrate the synthetic utility in polyketide synthesis by employing linchpin (+)-9 in a convergent synthesis of a potential C16−C29 fragment for rhizopodin (27, Figure 4 ), a C 2 -symmetric, 38-membered macrodiolide isolated from the myxobacterium Myxococcus stipitatus 10 that displays impressive biological properties, including selective potent cytotoxicity against a range of human cancer cell lines, 11 with the enamide side chain, a highly conserved moiety, responsible for protein recognition.
12 As such, 27 has been the object of numerous synthetic efforts. 13 Our retrosynthetic analysis of the C16−C29 fragment is depicted in Figure 4 . Here, we envisioned a highly convergent assembly of the full C16−C29 carbon segment 28 via a single-flask Type II ARC tactic, involving lithiation of vinyl iodide 29, Felkin-controlled addition to aldehyde (+)-9, [1,4]-Brook rearrangement, and termination with epoxide 30.
The synthesis of 28 thus began with the preparation of the requisite ARC fragments, 29 and 30 ( Figure 5 ). Vinyl iodide 29 was constructed from diol 31 as follows: monoprotection with TBSCl followed by Parikh−Doering oxidation 14 afforded aldehyde 32; Takai olefination 15 then delivered 29 in 77% yield ( Figure 5A ). In turn, elaboration of 30 entailed the asymmetric crotylation of aldehyde 33 16 to furnish homoallylic alcohol (−)-34 in 93% yield. O-Methylation followed by epoxidation led to 30, obtained as a 1:1 mixture of diastereomers at C24, and then employed as such in preliminary studies of the ARC key step; in fact, the stereoconfiguration at C24 ultimately becomes irrelevant as it comprises a carbonyl in the targeted natural product (see Figure 4) . Having demonstrated the viability of 30 as a terminating electrophile for the key fragment union (not shown), we decided to move forward in our rhizopodin synthetic studies with a single diastereomer of 30 in order to facilitate both reaction monitoring and chromatographic separation. We thus turned to the iodo carbonate cyclization of (−)-34 to install the requisite epoxide functionality, which generally favors formation of 1,3-syn stereoarrays with good selectivities. 17 To our surprise, the well-established protocols employing N-iodosuccinimide 17b,c resulted in diastereomeric mixtures when applied to the Boc carbonate of (−)-34, while iodine 17a led to loss of the terminal BPS protection. Pleasingly, use of iodine monobromide, a protocol developed in our laboratory, 17d cleanly furnished the desired stereoisomer (dr 11:1; the minor diastereomer was removed by column chromatography). The synthesis of (−)-30 was thus completed by removal of the Boc-carbonate under basic conditions with concomitant closure of the oxirane ring, followed by O-methylation ( Figure 5B have proved unfruitful, presumably due to the significant steric hindrance at the projected reactive site. Alternative pathways are currently being investigated in our laboratory. In summary, we have achieved the design, synthesis and validation of a new effective aldehyde bifunctional linchpin (9) for Type II ARC fragment unions. Importantly, this linchpin enables the rapid construction of propionate-containing polyketide fragments for natural product total synthesis, exploiting highly efficient multicomponent ARC tactics. The utility of this new protocol is demonstrated in ongoing synthetic studies toward the C16−C29 fragment of rhizopodin.
■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
The protective efficacy of glucan as an adjuvant with killed promastigotes of Leishmania donovani was compared with that of soluble or particulate fractions of the parasite. When these vaccine preparations were injected either intravenously or subcutaneously in CF-1 mice, glucan potentiated resistance against L. donovani infections as reflected by significant reductions in hepatic amastigote counts relative to infected control mice. The leishmanial antigens alone afforded no protection. Serum direct agglutination titers to leishmanial antigens were highest in all groups given the vaccine intravenously, whereas the delayed-type hypersensitivity response to the antigen was positive only in groups immunized subcutaneously with glucan as an adjuvant. Some index of protection and immune response against visceral infection with the parasite was seen in groups vaccinated with glucan and soluble antigens. However, the protection afforded by glucan and particulate antigens of L. donovani more closely paralleled the resistance of mice treated with glucan and unfractionated killed promastigotes. Further antigenic analysis of particulate fractions of L. donovani may optimize effective immunization when used with appropriate adjuvants, e.g., glucan.
Parasites of the genus Leishmania are kinetoplastid protozoa which infect humans and other mammalian species. In these hosts, the leishmaniae have a predilection for macrophages of the reticuloendothelial system, where they multiply as obligatory intracellular organisms. The species L. donovani is the causative agent of human visceral leishmaniasis (Kala-azar), a disease associated with significant morbidity and mortality in endemic geographic areas (18, 29) . The induction of protective immunity utilizing homologous killed vaccines would be a major step toward the control of such severe forms of leishmaniasis. However, the protection of experimental animals against leishmanial infections by the use of nonviable or attenuated parasites as vaccines has not been consistently achieved and has frequently produced disappointing results (14, 15; E. Marva and C. L. Greenblatt, J. Protozool. 26:49,1979 ). Immunogenic enhancement with appropriate adjuvants may thus be required to elicit protective immunity.
We have recently demonstrated the feasibility of such immunoprophylaxis with glucan, a p-1,3-glucopyranose derivative of yeast cell walls (10) . Intravenous injections of glucan provided nonspecific protection against L. donovani infections in both mice (3, 11) and hamsters (2) as measured by lowered organ parasite burdens relative to control groups. Importantly, glucan was found to have a potent adjuvant effect when injected either intravenously or subcutaneously into mice with Formalin-killed promastigotes (lOa, 11). This specific immunity was evident when the mice were challenged with viable parasites up to 80 days after immunization. In the latter investigations, glucan treatment alone afforded minimal nonspecific protection, whereas animals immunized with injections of the killed parasite alone exhibited no resistance to infection (lOa, 11). In these previous immunization studies, intact Formalin-killed promastigotes were used as an antigenic stimulus in the presence of glucan. The further characterization of protective antigens essential for the induction of specific immunity is a necessary step toward optimizing effective vaccine preparations. The identification of antigenic subcellular fractions of Leishmania sp. and the differentiation of common and strainspecific antigens (9) may allow the eventual determination of suitable antigens that stimulate protective immunity. It has also been proposed that leishmaniae may contain two types of antigens: those which stimulate specific resistance to infection, i.e., particulate antigens; and those which depress specific resistance to infection, i.e., soluble antigens (21) . In the present study, we compared the efficacy of glucan as an adju-vant with particulate and with soluble fractions of L. donovani relative to intact Formalin-killed parasites or frozen-thawed preparations. Specifically, these vaccine preparations were tested both intravenously and subcutaneously in CF-1 mice. The criteria for the induction of protective immunity were based on lowered organ parasite counts, changes in serum direct agglutination titers, and delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) responses to leishmanial antigens.
Experimental animals and parasite. Female CF-1 mice were obtained commercially and maintained in air-conditioned quarters with food and water provided ad libitum. The mice were 8 to 10 weeks old at the beginning of the experiments. L. donovani 2S (23) was maintained by passage in outbred male hamsters. The methods used for the initiation and maintenance of promastigote stages in vitro have been described previously (2, 11) . The promastigotes used to initiate infection were harvested during the log phase of growth by centrifugation (900 x g, 30 min) and suspended in Earle balanced salt solution (EBSS) at the desired concentration as determined by counting in a hemacytometer. The promastigotes used for infection were passaged in vitro no more than 10 times.
Preparation of glucan and parasite antigens. Glucan was prepared from bakers' yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as described by the method of DiLuzio et al. (6) . The promastigotes were killed by freezing and thawing or by Formalin treatment. For the latter treatment, the promastigote forms used for immunization were harvested by the above method, washed three times in EBSS, and killed by suspension in 0.1% Formalin overnight. The dead promastigotes were washed three times and suspended in EBSS at the desired concentration. For the frozen-thawed preparation, the promastigotes, suspended in EBSS, were frozen at -70°C and then thawed at 37°C. This procedure was repeated three times. The criteria for the determination of promastigote death were the absence of parasite motility, failure of parasites to grow in vitro when inoculated into culture medium, and failure to initiate promastigote growth by in vitro cultivation from the ground spleens of immunized but unchallenged mice.
The particulate and soluble promastigote antigens were prepared from the frozen-thawed parasites. The preparation, on ice, was further fractionated by sonication at 30 MHz for a 1-min burst five times (Branson cell disruptor). The complete disruption of cellular integrity was verified by light microscopic examination. The preparation was centrifuged in a Sorvall (model RC-5B) for 11,100 x g for 20 min. The supernatant was decanted and passed through 0.2-,m membrane filters (Millipore Corp.). The particulate pellet was washed three times with EBSS and suspended to the original volume.
For the intravenous immunization, the mice received 0.2 ml of 1 x 10' killed promastigotes or the equivalent in soluble or particulate antigens with or without glucan (0.6 mg). The immunizing injections were given at 4-day intervals for four injections before challenge with 2 x 107 viable promastigotes on day 80 after the last immunization. The latter time interval, i.e., 80 days, was selected to preclude nonspecific protection by intravenous glucan (3) which may have masked its adjuvanticity with the killed parasite vaccine. For the subcutaneous study, the immunizing injections were given on days 48, 44, 40, and 21 before challenge with 1.0 x 107 promastigotes.
Monitoring of infection course. At designated times after infection, the mice in each treatment group were killed in chiloroform vapor, and body spleen and liver weights were recorded. Impression slides from the spleen and liver were fixed in methanol and stained with Giemsa, and the parasite burdens in the organs were determined by the method of Stauber (23) . DTH responsiveness was monitored by the footpad injection of washed promastigotes suspended in 0.5% phenol-saline (0.025 ml; 2.0 x 108/ml). The thickness of the inoculated foot was measured with dial calipers 24 h after injection, and the results were expressed as the percentage of increased thickness as compared with the uninjected contralateral foot. We have previously observed that the injection of the phenol-saline vehicle causes no significant increase in footpad swelling. Antibody detection was by the direct agglutination test, with trypsin-Formalin-treated promastigotes (108/ ml) as the antigen (25 intravenously treated groups also remained negative on days 15, 28, and 42 after infection. In the groups of mice receiving subcutaneous injections, all control groups were likewise negative at the time of infection (day 21 after the last injection) and on all days postinfection. The mice receiving subcutaneous glucan with parasite antigens were the only groups exhibiting positive DTH responses (Table 4) . At the time of challenge and on day 14 after infection, all mice receiving glucan and FTP were positive; a proportion of mice in the particulate-glucan group were positive, whereas all mice in the solubleglucan group were negative. The (8, 12) . However, the use of selflimiting infections against more severe forms of the disease in humans, i.e., visceral and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis, is impractical in view of the risk of parasite dissemination. Effective immunization with nonpathogenic heterologous isolates or killed vaccine preparations has either not been substantiated (18, 19) , or the data have been inconclusive (20) .
Immunization trials with killed or attenuated Leishmania parasites have also been attempted in laboratory animals with variable results. A loss of infectivity was induced in L. enriettii by gamma radiation, but multiple vaccinations conferred no protection against the homologous parasite in guinea pigs (15) . On the other hand, Coutinho (4) found that killed promastigotes of L. enriettii provided a limited degree of protection in guinea pigs. Marva and Greenblatt (E. Marva and C. L. Greenblatt, J. Protozool. 26:49, 1979 ) were unable to demonstrate protective immunity in mice vaccinated with L. tropica promastigotes which had been inactivated by exposure to acriflavine in vitro. Likewise, Lainson and Bray (14) found that intradermal injections of Formalin-killed L. mexicana with Freund adjuvant conferred no immunity on either mice or hamsters. More recently, Beacham et al. (1) found that sonicated preparations of L. braziliensis did afford a degree of protection in the African white-tail rat against cutaneous infection with that parasite.
The present study extends our previous observation that vaccination with killed promastigotes of L. donovani provides no protection in CF-i mice when given either subcutaneously or intravenously (lOa, 11). The subcutaneous administration of glucan alone also failed to elicit nonspecific resistance against L. donovani infection (5) , and this hyperfunctional reticuloendothelial system coincides with maximal resistance against L. donovani infections in mice (3) . Since the challenge with the viable inoculum in the present study was 80 days after the last intravenous vaccination, it is likely that an effective degree of nonspecific reticuloendothelial system stimulation by glucan was no longer present. As an adjuvant, glucan was effective in enhancing host resistance when given by both injection routes with the FTP preparation, and the degree of adjuvanticity observed was comparable to that previously demonstrated with intact Formalin-killed promastigotes (lOa, 11) . The fact that subcutaneous vaccination was effective is particularly important since the effects of intravascular glucan (see above) are potential contraindications for its clinical use. It also should be noted that glucan has been used as an intralesional treatment against malignant melanoma in patients and elicits few adverse side effects (17) . An additional feature of the subcutaneously vaccinated group was the demonstrable DTH response to leishmanial antigens that was not seen in other control groups.
The induction of such measurable immunological parameters may have important predictive value with regard to resistance to infection. This measure of cellular immunity did correlate well with enhanced resistance to infection in those groups immunized subcutaneously. The DTH response, however, was of no predictive value in mice immunized intravenously since all groups exhibited a negative reaction. Other indices of cellular immunity may thus be necessary to demonstrate enhanced immunocompetence after intravascular immunization.
Antibody titers were slightly higher in the mice immunized intravenously with glucan and leishmanial antigens, thus further indicating the adjuvant activity of the compound. Whether these enhanced antibody titers were of any consequence to the course of infection or are contingent upon the route of injection cannot be ascertained from present data. Cellular rather than humoral mechanisms, however, have been proposed as being primarily responsible for acquired immunity against visceral leishmaniasis (18, 24) . Additionally, antibody titers were comparatively low in the subcutaneously vaccinated mice despite the observation of strong resistance to infection in the adjuvant-treated mice.
Protection against L. donovani with vaccine preparations from parasite antigenic extracts has not been adequately investigated. Preston and cellular immune responsiveness when glucan was given as an adjuvant. With the exception of a higher organ parasite number on day 15 postinfection in the mice injected intravenously with the soluble antigens, no other evidence of impaired resistance to infection compared with the untreated controls was seen. This differs from the augmented L. enriettii infections induced with soluble leishmanial antigens in guinea pigs (21) . Such effects may well reflect intrinsic differences in the pathogenicity of these two leishmanial species, as well as the difference in animal models.
Ribosome-derived and ribonucleic-acid-rich extracts of some bacteria, fungi (7, 12, 17, 18, 28) and, more recently, of the kinetoplastid protozoon Trypanosoma cruzi (16) have been shown to confer a degree of protective immunity against infection in experimental animals. Studies aimed at further antigenic analysis of ribosomal and other subcellular fractions of L. donovani are merited to differentiate common and strain-specific antigens. The employment of effective adjuvants, e.g., glucan, with immunogenic fractions of the parasite may provide a practical and rational approach to potential immunoprophylaxis against visceral leishmaniasis. 
T he inflammatory cascade underlying the immune response of an organism toward pathogens is largely controlled by the actions of different mediators released under inflammatory conditions. Upon activation, blood monocytes and tissue macrophages release a set of primary inflammatory mediators, such as IL-1␤ and TNF-␣, thereby inducing the synthesis and secretion of several secondary cytokines and chemokines, such as IL-6 and IL-8, by macrophages, monocytes, and local stromal cells. Recruitment of other immune effector cells by chemotaxis then rapidly augments the local inflammatory response to counteract the inflammatory stimulus and to remove cellular debris associated with tissue damage (reviewed in Refs. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] .
In this context IL-6 has been considered a proinflammatory cytokine, since its expression is elevated in inflammatory diseases and is induced by inflammatory stimuli, such as IL-1␤ and TNF-␣ (1, 2, 5). Many of its proinflammatory and immune properties are due to the activation of B cells to produce Abs due to the stimulation of T cells and the induction of chemokine and adhesion molecule expression in endothelial cells (2, (5) (6) (7) (8) . However, on macrophages (5-7), astrocytes (9) , and fibroblasts (10) IL-6 has suppressive effects on their inflammatory response and represses the expression of IL-12, IFN-␥, IL-1␤, TNF-␣, adhesion molecules, and proteases both in vitro and in vivo (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) . In line with this, IL-6 is able to induce the expression of IL-1␤R antagonist and soluble TNF receptor p55, antagonizing IL-1␤ and TNF-␣ activities, respectively (11, 12) .
Thus, IL-6 mediates both pro-and anti-inflammatory effects. IL-6 is expressed throughout every stage of the inflammatory response, and at least during the onset of inflammation several of its anti-inflammatory properties would be inconvenient (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) . Therefore, it is mandatory that molecular mechanisms modulating IL-6 action exist.
IL-6 mediates its biological activities through a receptor complex composed of the specific receptor subunit gp80 and a dimer of the signal-transducing receptor subunit gp130 (2) . After ligand binding and dimerization of gp130, tyrosine kinase of the Janus family (Jak), 3 Jak1, Jak2, and Tyk2, constitutively associated with gp130, becomes activated by autophosphorylation. The gp130 subsequently tyrosine-phosphorylated on its cytoplasmic tail recruits transcription factors of the STAT family (13, 14) and Src homology protein tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2) (15) via specific phosphotyrosine-SH2 domain interactions involving the tyrosine 759 of the gp130 receptor (16, 17) . In turn, these components also become tyrosine phosphorylated. Activated STATs homo-or heterodimerize (18) , translocate to the nucleus, and bind to enhancer elements of target genes (19) .
The Jak/STAT signal transduction pathway is under negative control by several different mechanisms. The presence of a nuclear phosphatase leading to dephosphorylation and inactivation of activated STATs in the nucleus has been proposed by Haspel et al. (20) . On the other hand, Kim and Maniatis (21) demonstrated a proteasome-dependent loss of activated STAT1 in the nucleus. Recently, another group of inhibitors of the Jak/STAT pathway has been described: STAT-binding proteins, known as protein inhibitors of activated STATs (PIAS) (22, 23) . Although the PIAS do not contain phosphotyrosine binding domains such as SH2 or protein tyrosine binding domains, they associate with activated, tyrosine-phosphorylated STATs, leading to a loss of STAT-DNA binding activity. The mechanism and regulation of this highly specific interaction of protein inhibitor of activated STATs with activated STAT factors remain to be elucidated. Another new family of inhibitors of cytokine signaling has recently been discovered in three different laboratories. These proteins are referred to as suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) (24) , Jak-binding proteins (25) , or STAT-induced STAT inhibitors (26) . SOCS proteins can also be regarded as feedback inhibitors of cytokine signaling, since they are partially induced by cytokines mediating their own signals via activation of the Jak/STAT cascade. Furthermore, the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 was found to inhibit IL-6 signal transduction. Activation of the IL-6R complex leads to recruitment of SHP2 to tyrosine 759 in gp130 and its subsequent tyrosine phosphorylation (15) . SHP2 activation is a crucial event for the induction of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway upon IL-6 stimulation (27) . Mutation of Tyr 759 in gp130 results in enhanced and prolonged STAT1 and STAT3 activation by IL-6-type cytokines and increased gene induction of STAT-dependent genes (28 -30) .
In terms of cytokine cross-talk, all these mechanisms can likewise be used by other mediators to influence cytokine signaling via the Jak/STAT signal transduction cascade and therefore represent a potential molecular switch modulating the cellular response toward IL-6, e.g., TNF-␣ and LPS act as inhibitors of IL-6 and IFN-␥-mediated STAT-activation, at least in the case of TNF-␣ probably through p38 MAPK -dependent induction of SOCS3 (31, 32) . Since SHP2 recruitment to the gp130 receptor negatively regulates IL-6-induced STAT activation (33), we asked whether SHP2 might participate in TNF-␣-mediated modulation of IL-6 signal transduction. Using mouse peritoneal RAW 264.7 macrophages and NIH-3T3 fibroblasts, we observed association to gp130 and tyrosine phosphorylation of SHP2 upon stimulation with TNF-␣. Finally, mutation of the SHP2 binding site tyrosine 759 of gp130 results in an insensitivity toward preincubation with TNF-␣. The recruitment of SHP2 to gp130 as a key event for the TNF-␣-induced inhibition of IL-6-dependent STAT activation is further supported by studies in murine fibroblasts lacking functional SHP2.

Polymerase was purchased from Roche (Mannheim, Germany); oligonucleotides were obtained from MWG-Biotech (Ebersberg, Germany); recombinant erythropoietin (Epo) was a gift from Drs. J. Burg and K. H. Sellinger (Roche); DMEM, DMEM nutritional mix F-12, OpitMEM, and FCS were obtained from Life Technologies (Eggstein, Germany). Recombinant human IL-6 and soluble IL-6R sgp80 were prepared as previously described (34) . The following Abs were used: rabbit polyclonal Ab specifically raised against extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (Erk2), SHP2, or gp130 (M20; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA); rabbit polyclonal Ab specifically raised against STAT3 phosphorylated at tyrosine 705, and mouse mAb specifically recognizing phosphorylated (activated) p42/p44 were obtained from Cell Signal Transduction Technology (Beverly, MA); mAb against STAT3 was purchased from BD Transduction Laboratories (San Diego, CA). For detection of tyrosine phosphorylation, anti-phosphotyrosine mouse mAb 4G10 (Upstate Biotechnology, Lake Placid, NY) was used.
RAW 264.7 cells were cultivated in DMEM (1000 mg of glucose/liter) with Glutamax supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FCS, streptomycin (100 mg/liter), and penicillin (60 mg/L). NIH-3T3 cells were grown in DMEM (4500 mg of glucose/L) with Glutamax supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FCS, streptomycin (100 mg/L), and penicillin (60 mg/L). 3T3 embryonal fibroblasts were from SHP2 wild-type mice (SHP2-wt) or SHP2 exon 3-deficient mice (SHP2-mut) and were grown in DMEM (4500 mg of glucose/L) with Glutamax, 10% FCS, 100 mg/L streptomycin, and 60 mg/L penicillin (35) .
All experiments, except those for the analysis of protein phosphorylation, were performed in the respective culture medium supplemented with 10% FCS. For the analysis of STAT3 and Erk1/2 phosphorylation, medium was changed 12 h before the experiments were performed, and incubation was continued in the respective culture medium supplemented with 0.5% FCS to reduce background activity of Erk-type MAPKs.
Nuclear extracts were prepared as described by Andrews and Faller (36) . Protein concentration was determined by protein assay (Bio-Rad, Munich, Germany).
For reporter gene assay NIH-3T3 or MEF SHP2-wt and MEF SHP2-mut cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA). Briefly, cells were grown in DMEM with 4500 mg of glucose/L supplemented with 10% FCS on 12-well plates toward 80 -95% confluence. Cells were preincubated with 1 ml of OptiMEM 1 h before transfection. Lipofectamine 2000 (6 l) and in total 1.5 g of DNA were prediluted in 100 l of OptiMEM each. Diluted reagent and DNA were mixed, incubated for 20 min at room temperature, and then added to the cells. After 16 h medium was changed, and incubation was continued in DMEM with 4500 mg of glucose/liter supplemented with 10% FCS, streptomycin (100 mg/L), and penicillin (60 mg/L). For determination of the transcriptional activation of Elk-1, medium was changed before stimulation to culture medium supplemented with 0.5% FCS to reduce background activity. Cells were stimulated as indicated. Cell lysis and luciferase assays were conducted using the dual luciferase kit (Promega, Madison, WI) as described by the manufacturer. Luciferase activity values were normalized to transfection efficiency monitored by the cotransfected Renilla expression vector (Promega). Error bars are the SD calculated from three independent experiments performed on the same day. The data shown are representative of at least three different experiments with similar results.
For higher transfection efficiency cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 and a modified transfection procedure. In brief, 6 l of Lipofectamine 2000 were diluted in 250 l of OptiMEM, and 4 g of DNA was diluted in 50 l of OptiMEM. Diluted reagent and DNA were mixed and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. Meanwhile a confluent flask (75 cm 2 ) of NIH-3T3 cells was trypsinized and, after centrifugation, resuspended in 3.5 ml of DMEM with 4500 mg glucose/L supplemented with 10% FCS, then 300 l of resuspended cells were added to the transfection mixture. One milliliter of DMEM with 4500 mg of glucose/L supplemented with 10% FCS was added, and cells were seeded on a 60-mm culture dish. After a 12-h incubation at 37°C, medium was replaced by DMEM with 4500 mg glucose/L supplemented with 10% FCS, streptomycin (100 mg/L), and penicillin (60 mg/L), and cell culture was continued for another 24 h. Thereafter, experiments were performed as outlined in Results.
pGL3-␣ 2 M-215Luc contains the promoter region Ϫ215 to 18 of the rat ␣ 2 -macroglobulin gene fused to the luciferase encoding sequence and was described previously (30) . cDNAs for dominant negative p38 MAPK mutant tagged with the flag epitope (37) were cloned into the KRSPA expression vector as described by Flory et al. (38) . The expression vector pRc/ CMV-EG encoding the chimeric EpoR/gp130 receptor (pRc/CMV-EG (YYYYYY)) and the mutants where tyrosine 759 in the cytoplasmic domain of gp130 was exchanged for phenylalanine (pRc/CMV-EG (YFYYYY)) or all tyrosines of the cytoplasmic domain of gp130 were replaced by phenylalanine (pRc/CMV-EG (FFFFFF)) have been described previously (39) . The construction of pCBC1-SHP2-wt was described previously (30) . For the investigation of Erk-type MAPK activation, the vectors pFR-Luc and pFA2 Elk1 of the PathDetect trans-reporting system (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) were used. pFR-Luc encodes a sequence of five GAL4 binding elements fused to the luciferase encoding sequence. pFA2-Elk1 represents a fusion trans-activator plasmid that expresses a fusion protein of the activation domain of the transcription factor Elk1 fused with the yeast GAL4 DNA binding domain.
EMSAs were performed as described previously (19) . The protein-DNA complexes were separated on a 4.5% polyacrylamide gel containing 7.5% glycerol in 0.25-fold TBE (20 mM Tris base, 20 mM boric acid, and 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) at 20 V/cm for 4 h. Gels were fixed in 10% methanol, 10% acetic acid, and 80% water for 1 h; dried; and autoradiographed. The double-stranded 32 P-labeled mutated m67SIE oligonucleotide from the cFos promoter (m67SIE, 5Ј-GATCCGGGAGGGATTTACGGGAAATGC TG-3Ј) (40) was used for EMSA.
For immunoprecipitation cells grown in a 100-mm dish were stimulated with the respective cytokine at the concentrations indicated. Cells were washed twice with PBS supplemented with 0.1 mM Na 3 VO 4 and solubilized in 1 ml of lysis buffer (1% Triton, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 136 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM ␤-glycerophosphate, 20 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 4 mM benzamidine, 0.2 mM Pefabloc (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), 5 g/ml aprotinin, 5 g/ml leupeptin, and 10% glycerol) for 20 min at 4°C. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation, and the cell lysate was incubated overnight with specific Abs and protein A-Sepharose 4 Fast Flow (Amersham Pharmacia, Freiburg, Germany) (8 mg/ml in lysis buffer) at 4°C. After centrifugation, the Sepharose beads were washed twice with wash buffer (0.1% Triton, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 136 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM ␤-glycerophosphate, 20 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 4 mM benzamidine, 0.2 mM Pefabloc, 5 g/ml aprotinin, 5 g/ml leupeptin, and 10% glycerol). The samples were boiled in gel electrophoresis sample buffer, and the precipitated proteins were separated on an SDS-polyacrylamide (7.5%) gel.
The electrophoretically separated proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes by the semidry Western blotting method. Nonspecific binding was blocked with 3% nonfatty dry milk powder in TBS-T (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 137 mM NaCl, and 0.1% Tween) overnight at 4°C. For analysis of protein phosphorylation of Erk-type MAPKs or STAT3, nonspecific binding was blocked with 5% BSA in TBS-T. The blots were incubated overnight at 4°C or for 2 h at room temperature with primary Abs at the dilution indicated in TBS-T. After extensive rinsing with TBS-T, blots were incubated with secondary Abs, goat anti-rabbit IgG, or goat anti-mouse IgG conjugated to HRP for 1.5 h. After further rinsing in TBS-T, the immunoblots were developed with the ECL system following the manufacturer's instructions (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Arlington Heights, IL).

The SHP2 recruitment site within gp130 is involved in negative regulation of IL-6-induced STAT activation and gene induction (28 -30) . Thus, SHP2 might also play a role in the TNF-␣-mediated modulation of IL-6 signal transduction. Therefore, we tested whether TNF-␣ affects SHP2 binding to gp130. Figs. 1 and 2A show SHP2 and gp130 coimmunoprecipitated by either a gp130-or an SHP2-specific Ab from total cell lysates of RAW 264.7 mouse peritoneal macrophages stimulated with TNF-␣ for different time periods. Association of gp130 and SHP2 was already detectable after 5 min of stimulation and became pronounced after 20 -40 min. This indicates that TNF-␣ is able to mediate recruitment of SHP2 to gp130. Association of SHP2 and gp130 was paralleled by TNF-␣-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of both proteins, as shown in Fig. 2, A and B . In contrast to IL-6, TNF-␣ did not lead to activation of STAT1 and -3, as shown in Fig. 2C . This indicates that TNF-␣ time-dependently induces association of SHP2 to the signal-transducing subunit gp130 paralleled by tyrosine phosphorylation of SHP2 and gp130. The fact that upon stimulation with TNF-␣ STAT3 activation was not detectable argues against TNF-␣-induced release of IL-6 leading to subsequent SHP2 recruitment to gp130.
To further analyze the cross-talk between TNF-␣ and IL-6 signaling the effect of TNF-␣ on the IL-6-dependent recruitment of SHP2 to the cytoplasmic tail of gp130 was studied in RAW 264.7 macrophages. As shown in Fig. 3A , SHP2 was recruited to gp130 upon stimulation of RAW 264.7 macrophages with IL-6. Recruitment of SHP2 to gp130 was most pronounced after ϳ20 min of treatment with IL-6 and was paralleled by IL-6-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of gp130 and SHP2. Pretreatment with TNF-␣ for 40 min led to maximal complex formation of gp130 and SHP2 after 5 min of IL-6 treatment; this declined thereafter to baseline levels within 40 min. Since this time course (complex formation 40 min post-TNF-␣) resembles that shown in Fig. 1 , it is likely that TNF-␣ prevents SHP2 recruitment in response to IL-6 treatment, although the preceding TNF-␣-induced complex formation is unaffected.
Additionally, we analyzed the influence of TNF-␣ preincubation on the two major IL-6 downstream signaling events, the activation of STAT factors and of Erk-type MAPKs. It is conspicuous that pretreatment with TNF-␣ inhibits IL-6-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 and STAT3 DNA binding (Figs. 4A and 3B), whereas activation of Erk-type MAPKs was not inhibited, but, rather, was accelerated and enhanced ( Fig. 4B) , particularly during the first 10 -20 min, which correlates to the SHP2 recruitment found in macrophages upon costimulation with TNF-␣ and IL-6 shown in Fig. 3A . These findings suggest that TNF-␣ not only inhibits IL-6 signaling, but modulates IL-6-induced signal transduction.
Recruitment of SHP2 and SOCS3 to the gp130 receptor subunit depends on the phosphorylation of the tyrosine residue 759 of gp130 (15, 39, 41) . To understand the role of this SHP2/SOCS3 recruitment site in TNF-␣-mediated inhibition of IL-6-induced STAT activation, signaling through a gp130 receptor mutant, where a phenylalanine residue was substituted for the tyrosine residue 759 of the SHP2/SOCS3 recruitment site, was analyzed. To perform such studies NIH-3T3 cells were selected because these cells can easily be transfected. As shown in Fig. 5, A and B , TNF-␣ FIGURE 1. TNF-␣-dependent coimmunoprecipitation of gp130 and SHP2. RAW 264.7 cells were stimulated with TNF-␣ (10 ng/ml) for the times indicated. Cells were solubilized, and immunoprecipitation was performed using 1 g of a polyclonal Ab specific for the tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 as described in Materials and Methods. Thereafter, precipitated proteins were separated on an SDS-polyacrylamide (7.5%) gel and blotted onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. Membranes were cut in two parts at the level of ϳ80 kDa, and the upper part was incubated with polyclonal Ab raised against gp130 (1/2500; upper panel), whereas the lower part was incubated with polyclonal Ab for detection of SHP2 (1/ 4000; lower panel).
exerts the same effects on IL-6 signal transduction in NIH-3T3 cells as those described for RAW 264.7 macrophages. Preincubation with TNF-␣ inhibits IL-6-induced STAT3 activation (Fig.  5A) , and TNF-␣ again leads to recruitment of SHP2 to gp130 (Fig.  5B) , indicating that these cells are suitable for the following experiments.
For analyzing signaling through mutated receptor constructs we had to avoid stimulation of endogenous wild-type receptors. Therefore, chimeric receptor containing the extracellular domain of the Epo receptor and the transmembrane and wild-type (EG (YYYYYY)) or mutated cytoplasmic domains of gp130 (EG(Y FYYYY)) or for control EG(FFFFFF)) were used. These constructs were cotransfected together with a STAT3-responsive ␣ 2 -macroglobulin promoter/luciferase reporter into NIH-3T3 fibroblasts.
Stimulation of cells expressing EG(YYYYYY) with Epo led to a significant expression of the reporter. According to the findings for IL-6-induced STAT3 activation, transcriptional activation of the reporter by Epo was inhibited by preincubation with TNF-␣ (Fig. 5C ). This inhibitory activity of TNF-␣ depended on the presence of Y759 in gp130, since its mutation counteracted the inhibitory function of TNF-␣ and led to increased IL-6-induced reporter FIGURE 2. TNF-␣-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of SHP2 and gp130. RAW 264.7 cells were stimulated with TNF-␣ (10 ng/ml) for the time indicated. As described in Materials and Methods, cell lysates were prepared, and immunoprecipitation and subsequent immunoblotting were performed using 1 g of a polyclonal Ab specific for the receptor subunit gp130 (A) or the tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 (B). For detection of tyrosinephosphorylated proteins, membranes were incubated using an mAb specifically raised against phosphotyrosine motifs (4G10; 1/1000; A, upper and third panels; B, upper panel). Blots were stripped. For A, membranes were cut in two parts at the level of ϳ80 kDa, and the upper part was incubated with polyclonal Ab raised against gp130 (1/1500; second panel), whereas the lower part was incubated with polyclonal Ab for detection of SHP2 (1/4000; last panel). For B, membranes were reprobed with polyclonal Ab specifically raised against SHP2 (1/4000; lower panel). C, For determination of the STAT activation cells were stimulated with TNF-␣ (10 ng/ml) or IL-6 (200 U/ml) for the time indicated. Determination of STAT activation was performed after preparation of nuclear extracts. Five micrograms of nuclear protein was mixed with a STAT1/3-specific For A, cells were solubilized, and immunoprecipitation was performed using a polyclonal Ab specific for SHP2 as described in Materials and Methods. For analyses of tyrosine phosphorylation (first and third panels), membranes were incubated using a phosphotyrosine-specific monoclonal Ab (4G10; 1/1000). Blots were stripped, and membranes were cut into two parts at the level of ϳ80 kDa. The upper part was incubated with polyclonal Ab specific for gp130 (1/2500; second panel), whereas the lower part was incubated with polyclonal Ab raised against SHP2 (1/4000; lower panel). For B, determination of STAT DNA binding from identically treated cells was conducted as described in Fig. 1. activity. Receptors lacking all cytoplasmic tyrosine motifs (EG(FFFFFF)) did not mediate any significant gene induction.

MAPK is involved in the inhibition of IL-6-induced STAT activation by proinflammatory mediators such as TNF-␣ (31, 42, 43). Thus, it was intriguing to investigate the effect of p38 MAPK on TNF-␣-induced SHP2 recruitment to gp130, inhibition of IL-6-induced STAT activation, and gene expression. Until now, the role of p38 MAPK for the inhibitory effects of TNF-␣ on IL-6-induced STAT3 activation was only demonstrated by studies using low m.w. inhibitors thought to be specific for p38 MAPK . In this study we performed a more specific experimental approach using dominant negative p38 MAPK (37) to confirm the inhibitory function of p38 MAPK . As shown in Fig. 6 the inhibition of gp130-mediated STAT3 activation (Fig. 6A ) and transcriptional activation of the STAT3-responsive reporter gene (Fig. 6B) by TNF-␣ pretreatment was completely restored by cotransfection of this inactive mutant of p38 MAPK (compare two left panels in Fig. 6, A and B) . Thus, these findings provide further evidence that activation of p38 MAPK is indeed involved in inhibition of gp130-dependent STAT3 activation by TNF-␣.
However, the enhanced transcriptional activation achieved by cotransfection of the inactive p38
MAPK was not as strong as that observed by mutating tyrosine 759 of gp130 (compare panels 2 and 3 in Fig. 6, A and B) . Furthermore, no additional effect of dominant negative p38 MAPK was observed in cells expressing EG (YFYYYY) ( panels 3 and 4 in Fig. 6B ). Thus, these data indicate that besides the inhibitory activity of p38
MAPK further inhibitory signals are integrated to gp130-dependent signal transduction via tyrosine 759.
To determine whether TNF-␣-induced recruitment of the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 to gp130 might depend on p38 MAPK or tyrosine kinase activity, inhibitor studies were performed in RAW264.7 cells. As shown in the coimmunoprecipitation studies with SHP2-specific Abs in Fig. 7A , inhibition of p38 MAPK activation by pretreatment with SB202190, an inhibitor supposed to be specific for p38 MAPK , reduces TNF-␣-dependent SHP2 recruitment to gp130. These data suggest that activation of p38 MAPK might be involved in the recruitment of SHP2 to gp130 upon stimulation with TNF-␣. On the other hand, pretreatment with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein also inhibited SHP2 recruitment to gp130 upon stimulation with TNF-␣, indicating that tyrosine kinase activity is also required (Fig. 7B) .
SHP2 have been demonstrated to serve as an adaptor protein linking gp130 signal transduction to Erk-type MAPK signaling (27) . We therefore asked whether p38 MAPK might also be involved in activation of Erk-1/2 by IL-6, TNF-␣, or TNF-␣ plus IL-6. To address this question, reporter gene assays were performed in NIH-3T3 cells using a plasmid that expresses a fusion protein of the activation domain of the transcription factor Elk1 (pFA-Elk1) fused with the yeast GAL4 DNA binding domain. Phosphorylation of the Elk1 activation domain induces transcriptional activation of a reporter plasmid encoding a sequence of five GAL4 binding elements fused to the luciferase-encoding sequence (pFA-Luc).
As shown in Fig. 8 transcriptional activation via the Elk1 transactivating fusion protein is induced by stimulation of the cotransfected chimeric EG (YYYYYY) receptor with erythropoietin. According to the data shown for Erk-type MAPK activation in Fig. 4 , costimulation with TNF-␣ or stimulation with TNF-␣ alone results in a much stronger expression of luciferase activity. However, cotransfection of an inactive mutant of p38 MAPK leads to a significant enhancement of the transcriptional activation of Elk1 after costimulation with TNF-␣ plus Epo or stimulation with TNF-␣ alone, whereas basal and Epo-induced activation was only slightly affected. Since activation of Elk1 is downstream from Erk/MAPK (44) one can conclude from these data that p38
MAPK counteracts MAPK activity induced by TNF-␣, but does not play a specific role for IL-6-induced activation of MAPK activity and the effects of TNF-␣ on this. With respect to this, it is interesting to note that p38 MAPK is involved in the stress-induced expression of members of the MAPK phosphatase family, thereby counteracting the activation of MAPKs (45) (46) (47) . Thus, one might speculate that TNF-␣ balances the activation of Erk-1/2 via p38 MAPK -dependent activation of members of the MAPK phosphatase family.
As shown in Fig. 9 , the expression of SHP2 strongly suppressed STAT activation mediated by the wild-type EpoR/gp130 chimera, indicating the inhibitory potential of SHP2 with respect to gp130-dependent signal transduction. To further reveal the implication of SHP2 in inhibition of IL-6 signaling by TNF-␣, the inhibition of STAT3 and promoter activation was analyzed in murine fibroblasts lacking exon 3 of SHP2. These cells express a mutant SHP2 protein lacking 65 aa within the N-terminal SH2 domain (35) . In clear contrast to the corresponding wild-type fibroblasts (SHP2-wt), IL-6-induced STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA binding in SHP2-mut cells was almost not affected by preincubation with TNF-␣ (Fig. 10, A and B) . Accordingly, preincubation of wild-type cells with TNF-␣ inhibited gp130-dependent transcriptional activation of the ␣ 2 -macroglobulin promoter reporter gene construct, whereas no inhibitory effect of TNF-␣ could be observed in cells expressing the SHP2-mutant (Fig. 10C) . These data clearly indicate that SHP2 is involved in inhibition of IL-6 signal transduction by TNF-␣.
In the past it became increasingly evident that the IL-6 signal transduction is substantially modulated by proinflammatory mediators such as TNF-␣, IL-1␤, and LPS. It was demonstrated that TNF-␣ and LPS inhibit IL-6-induced activation of STAT3 in several types of macrophages, monocytic cell lines, and synovial fibroblasts (31, 42-43) . Furthermore, IL-1␤ inhibits IL-6-induced signal transduction and expression of acute phase proteins in liver cells (48 -51) . The underlying molecular mechanisms for this cytokine cross-talk on the level of signal transduction are scarcely known. Induction of SOCS3 expression, which was at least partially dependent on activation of p38 MAPK , has been proposed as a possible mechanism for the inhibitory effects of TNF-␣ and LPS on IL-6 signaling (31). On the other hand, several lines of evidence exist that p38 MAPK -dependent inhibition of IL-6-induced STAT3 by IL-1␤ occurs in the absence of new protein synthesis. This indicates that in this context protein synthesis, and thus SOCS expression, is not essential for inhibition of IL-6 signaling by IL-1␤ (42, 43) . Furthermore, analyzing the mechanism underlying the IL-1␤-mediated attenuation of IL-6 signal transduction and acute phase protein synthesis, it was observed that IL-1␤ did not induce SOCS3 gene expression in hepatic parenchymal cells and barely affected IL-6-mediated STAT3 activation, but did affect its binding to IL-6-responsive promoters (51) . In these studies NF-B was identified as a mediator of IL-1␤-dependent negative regulation of IL-6-inducible genes (50, 51) . Most likely, in this context NF-B exerts its negative regulatory function by counteracting DNA binding of STAT3 at overlapping STAT3/NF-B binding sites within the promoter region of the respective gene. This regulatory mechanism represents a very fast and accurate mode by which IL-1␤ modulates IL-6-induced gene expression of specific target genes (50, 51). A, NIH-3T3 cells were pretreated for 40 min with TNF-␣ (10 ng/ml) and then stimulated with IL-6 (200 U/ml) and soluble gp80 (10 g/ml) for the times indicated. After preparation of nuclear extracts, STAT activation was analyzed by EMSA as described in Fig. 1 and Materials and Methods. B, After stimulation of NIH-3T3 cells with TNF-␣ (10 ng/ml) for the time indicated, cell lysates were prepared, and immunoprecipitation was performed using 1 g of an Ab specific for SHP2. Subsequent to immunoblotting, membranes were cut into two parts at the level of ϳ80 kDa, and the upper part was incubated with polyclonal Ab raised against gp130 (1/2500; upper panel), whereas the lower part was incubated with polyclonal SHP2 Ab (1/4000; lower panel). C, NIH-3T3 cells were cotransfected with a reporter gene construct containing the ␣ 2 -macroglobulin promoter (Ϫ209 to ϩ8) fused to the firefly luciferase gene and expression vectors for chimeric receptors containing the extracellular domain of the Epo receptor and the transmembrane and wild-type (EG(YYYYYY)) or mutated cytoplasmic domains of gp130 where the tyrosine residue 759 of the SHP2/SOCS3 recruitment site (EG(YFYYYY)) or all six tyrosine residues (EG(FFFFFF)) were substituted by phenylalanine. An expression vector for Renilla luciferase was cotransfected for monitoring transfection efficiency. Two days after transfection, cells were preincubated with 10 ng/ml TNF-␣ for 40 min and stimulated with or without Epo (7 U/ml) for 10 h as shown. Luciferase activity in cellular extracts of these cells was determined and normalized to the Renilla luciferase activity as outlined in Materials and Methods.
In this paper we identified the recruitment of SHP2 to the cytoplasmic part of the gp130 signal-transducing subunit of the IL-6R complex as another fast-acting mechanism crucial for the TNF-␣-dependent negative regulation of IL-6-mediated STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation and activation in macrophages and fibroblast cell lines. Inhibitor studies revealed that TNF-␣-induced binding of SHP2 to gp130 might depend on protein tyrosine kinase activity and activation of p38 MAPK (Fig. 7) . In line with these findings, the expression of a dominant negative p38 MAPK completely restores inhibition of IL-6-induced STAT activation by TNF-␣, further indicating the importance of p38 MAPK for mediating the effect of TNF-␣ on IL-6 signal transduction (Fig. 6) . Furthermore, evidence is given that tyrosine phosphorylation of the tyrosine 759 of the cytoplasmic tail of gp130 is a central event for the inhibitory action of TNF-␣ on IL-6 signaling (Figs. 5 and 6 ). Phosphorylation of this tyrosine has been shown to be crucial for the recruitment of both the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 and the SOCS3 to the gp130 signal-transducing subunit (15, 39, 41 ).
Thus, both SHP2 and SOCS3 might contribute to TNF-␣-dependent signal attenuation. Indeed, the expression of SOCS3 occurs upon stimulation of macrophages with TNF-␣ (31), and on the other hand, specific disturbance of SHP2 recruitment to gp130 also diminishes the inhibitory activity of TNF-␣ (Fig. 10) . The individual contributions of SHP2 and SOCS3 in the context of TNF-␣ remains to be established. In this respect, it was recently demonstrated that SHP2 and SOCS3, although recruited to the same site of gp130, are able to exert their inhibitory function independently of each other (33) . Since SOCS3 protein remains detectable longer than SHP2 tyrosine phosphorylation, and recruitment of SHP2 to gp130 Ϫ SHP2 may be important for early signal attenuation, whereas SOCS3 acts later.
As mentioned above, p38 MAPK was demonstrated to be involved in the inhibitory action of proinflammatory mediators (31, 42, 43) . Particularly, activation of p38
MAPK was shown to be essential for the TNF-␣-and LPS-induced expression of SOCS3 (31), but is also involved in the autoregulatory SOCS3 expression induced by ) and chimeric receptor constructs containing the transmembrane and wild-type (EG(YYYYYY)) or mutated cytoplasmic domains (EG(YFYYYY)) of gp130. After 2 days cells were pretreated for 40 min with TNF-␣ as indicated and then stimulated with Epo (7 U/ml) for 30 min. Thereafter, cells were harvested, and nuclear extracts for the assessment of STAT activation were prepared. STAT activation was analyzed by EMSA as outlined in Fig. 2 . B, NIH-3T3 cells were transiently cotransfected with either the empty KRSPA (control) vector or with dn p38
MAPK and the respective chimeric receptor construct EG(YYYYYY) or EG(Y-FYYYY). For determination of the transcriptional activation the ␣ 2 -macroglobulin promoter reporter gene construct was cotransfected. Transfection efficiency was monitored by cotransfected Renilla luciferase cDNA. Two days after transfection cells were preincubated with 10 ng/ml TNF-␣ for 40 min and stimulated with or without Epo (7 U/ml) for 10 h as shown. Luciferase activity in cellular extracts of these cells was determined and normalized to the Renilla luciferase activity as outlined in Materials and Methods.
IL-6 (52). The induction of SOCS3 has been suggested to be part of the molecular mechanism underlying the inhibitory effects of TNF-␣ and LPS. The expression of a dominant negative mutant of p38 MAPK completely rescues inhibition of gp130-mediated activation of STAT3 and the STAT3-dependent ␣ 2 -macroglobulin promoter (Fig. 6) . It is further demonstrated that inhibition of p38 MAPK using an inhibitor specific for p38 MAPK attenuates TNF-␣-induced recruitment of SHP2 to the gp130 subunit (Fig. 7A) . These data indicate that p38 MAPK activation by TNF-␣ might be involved in the TNF-␣-dependent recruitment of SHP2 to the gp130 receptor subunit. p38
MAPK is a serine/threonine protein kinase (53); thus, a direct influence on the tyrosine phosphorylation of gp130 is impossible. We could not detect reliable changes in TNF-␣-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of SHP2 and gp130 upon pretreatment with a p38 MAPK -specific inhibitor (data not shown), indicating that an involvement of p38 MAPK in regulation of tyrosine phosphorylation of gp130 is unlikely. However, the regulatory effect of p38 MAPK on SHP2 recruitment to gp130 might also depend on phosphorylation of additional sites representing a MAPK consensus motif. With respect to this, it is interesting to note that using truncated gp130 receptor constructs, Ahmed et al. (42) restricted the target of the p38 MAPK -mediated inhibitory effects on IL-6 signaling to the membrane-proximal 113 aa of the gp130 cytoplasmic tail, containing one consensus phosphorylation site for MAPKs and a serine-rich region (15) . Thus, this membrane-proximal region of gp130 might represent another target for the inhibitory effects of p38 MAPK on gp130-dependent signaling. Despite its inhibitory activity on IL-6-induced activation of STAT factors, SHP2 has been further shown to serve as an adaptor protein linking gp130 signal transduction to the Ras/Raf/Erk cascade (27, 54) . On the other hand, p38
MAPK interferes with TNF-␣-induced recruitment of SHP2 to gp130. Thus, one might expect that inhibition of p38 MAPK somehow affects TNF-␣/IL-6-induced FIGURE 9. Effects of SHP2 on IL-6-induced STAT-activation. NIH-3T3 cells were cotransfected with either the empty pCBC1 vector or with the expression plasmid pCBC1-SHP2WT (SHP2 wt) encoding for the wild-type protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 and the chimeric receptors (EG(YYYYYY) or EG(YFYYYY). After 2 days cells were pretreated for 40 min with TNF-␣ as indicated and then stimulated with Epo (7 U/ml) for 30 min. Thereafter cells were harvested, and nuclear extracts for the assessment of STAT activation were prepared. STAT activation was analyzed by EMSA as outlined in Fig. 2 . A) . The extract of total protein was submitted to immunoprecipitation as described in Materials and Methods using 1 g of Abs specific for the SHP2. After immunoblotting membranes were cut in two parts at the level of ϳ80 kDa and the upper part was incubated with polyclonal Ab specifically raised against gp130 (1/2500; upper panel), whereas the lower part was incubated with polyclonal Ab specifically raised against SHP2 (1/4000; lower panel).
MAPK counteracts MAPK activity induced by TNF-␣, but does not play a specific role for IL-6-induced activation of MAPK activity and the effects of TNF-␣ on this. NIH-3T3 cells were cotransfected with the chimeric receptor (EG(YYYYYY), the pFR-Luc plasmid and the pFA2 Elk1 plasmid of the PathDetect trans-reporting system from Stratagene and either the empty KRSPA vector or with a flag tagged kinasedeficient mutant of p38 MAPK (AF; dominant negative (dn) p38 MAPK ). Two days after transfection cells were preincubated with 10 ng/ml TNF-␣ for 40 min and stimulated with or without Epo (7 U/ml) for 10 h as shown. Luciferase activity in cellular extracts of these cells was determined and normalized to the Renilla luciferase activity as outlined in Materials and Methods.
Erk activation. As shown in Fig. 8 , cotransfection of a dominant negative mutant of p38 MAPK leads to enhanced transcriptional activation of Elk-1 in the presence of TNF-␣, but not upon activation of the Epo/gp130 receptor chimera with Epo. Considering that Elk-1 is downstream from Erk/MAPK activation (44), this suggests that p38 MAPK activity reduces transcriptional activation of Elk-1 by TNF-␣, but is not specifically involved in IL-6-induced Erk activation and the effect of TNF-␣ on it. However, further investigation is required to clarify the interplay between p38 MAPK and Erk activation upon costimulation with IL-6 and TNF-␣ as well as the role of SHP2 with respect to the activation of Erk-type MAPKs.
As demonstrated in this study, TNF-␣-induced recruitment of SHP2 to the cytoplasmic tail of gp130 is involved in the inhibitory effects of TNF-␣ on IL-6 signal transduction via STAT3. The observation that IL-6-induced Erk activation is enhanced rather than inhibited by costimulation with TNF-␣ suggests that SHP2 recruitment toward gp130 might function as a kind of molecular switch, inhibiting signal transduction via STAT factors, whereas signaling via Erk-type MAPKs is still admitted or even strengthened.
In some aspects this situation resembles to the COOH-terminal gp130
⌬STAT knockin mutation that deleted all STAT binding sites.
⌬STAT mutation displayed gastrointestinal ulceration and severe joint disease with features of chronic synovitis, cartilaginous metaplasia, and degradation of the articular cartilage (55) . In these animals mitogenic hyper-responsiveness of synovial cells to the leukemia inhibitory factor/IL-6 family of cytokines was related to sustained gp130-mediated SHP2/Ras/Erk activation and the lack of the activation of STAT factors. Thus, the pathologic changes observed in gp130 mice ⌬STAT are likely to arise from the disturbance of the otherwise balanced activation of the SHP2/Ras/ Erk and STAT signaling cascades emanating from gp130. The similarity of the modifications of gp130-dependent signal transduction in gp130
⌬STAT mice and those presented here are interesting, since TNF-␣ also blocks IL-6-induced STAT activation, but not the activation of Erk-type MAPKs (Fig. 4) . Thus, one might speculate that TNF-␣ provokes a pathophysiological situation in IL-6 signaling similar to that achieved with the COOHterminal gp130
⌬STAT knockin mutation that deleted all STAT binding sites.
Role of SHP2 for the inhibitory effects of TNF-␣ on IL-6-signaling. A, Murine fibroblasts lacking exon 3 of SHP2 (SHP2 mut) derived from the respective knockout mice and the corresponding wildtype fibroblasts (SHP2 wt) were pretreated with 10 ng/ml TNF-␣ for 40 min and stimulated with 150 U/ml of IL-6 and soluble IL-6 receptor (sgp80; 10 g/ml) for the times indicated. Thereafter, cells were harvested, and nuclear extracts for the assessment of STAT activation and tyrosine phosphorylation were prepared. STAT activation was analyzed by EMSA as outlined in Fig. 2 . B, Tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 was assessed by immunoblot analyses using Abs recognizing STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylated at tyrosine 705. As a loading control blots were stripped and reprobed with Abs specific for STAT3 (second panel). C, SHP2 wt and SHP2 mut fibroblasts were cotransfected with the ␣ 2 -macroglobulin promoter reporter gene construct and the chimeric receptors EG(YYYYYY). Two days after transfection, cells were preincubated with 10 ng/ml TNF-␣ for 40 min and stimulated with or without Epo (7 U/ml) for 10 h as shown. Luciferase activity in cellular extracts of these cells was determined and normalized to the Renilla luciferase activity as outlined in Materials and Methods.
The cancer stem cell concept was originally proven in myeloid leukemia [1] but accumulating evidence suggests that solid tumors as well contain a small fraction of cells capable of self-renewal and cancer propagation. The discovery of cancer stem cells is of prime clinical importance as it emphasizes their potential role in tumor maintenance, minimal residual disease and metastasis. As a result, identifying their precise phenotype and molecular identity will aid the therapeutic targeting of many malignancies [2] .
The phenotype of cancer stem cells is under extensive investigation and in many cases it seems to resemble that of normal stem cells. For example, medulloblastoma and glioblastoma-initiating cells express CD133, a marker also associated with normal hematopoietic progenitor cells [3, 4] . In addition, many tumors contain a Hoechst dye efflux sidepopulation (SP) of cells, denoting the presence of drugresistance pumps that possibly bestows these cells with an inherent chemotherapy resistance attribute similar to normal tissue stem cells [5] . Neuroblastoma is a tumor of the sympathetic nervous system and comprises the most common extracranial solid tumor in children. Its clinical presentation is characterized by heterogeneity, ranging from spontaneous regression to aggressive and metastatic behavior in advanced stages. It is postulated that the observed clinical outcomes may arise from variability in the cancer stem cell content and additional genetic changes of the involved neuroblasts [6, 7] . CD44 is a transmembrane glycoprotein which mediates cell to cell interactions and attachment to extracel-lular matrix mainly through hyaluronic acid. It has many isoforms resulting from alternative splicing or post-transcriptional glycosylation [8] , and their expression can be modulated by differentiation or mitogenic factors [9] . The prognostic significance of CD44 expression varies considerably depending on the isoform and the malignancy in question. In general terms, certain CD44 variant expression or loss of the standard isoform (CD44s) are unfavourable prognostic factors. In malignancies of the hematopoietic system, including myeloid leukemias, B-CLL, lymphomas and thymomas, CD44 variant expression is associated with poor prognosis [10] . Similar observations are made for breast and colon carcinomas [11, 12] . In ovarian carcinoma and neuroblastoma, however, CD44 expression is linked with better prognosis [13] . CD44 expression in neuroblastoma comprises a strong prognostic marker alongside tumor stage [14, 15] and is reversely correlated with N-myc amplification [16] .
In this study, we have investigated whether CD44 can be used as a marker to prospectively isolate tumor-initiating neuroblastoma cells. We observed that CD44 not only defines morphological differences between the positive and negative cell fractions of the SK-N-SH cell line, but these two populations behaved differently in vivo. Cells lacking CD44 expression formed subcutaneous tumors in NOD/ SCID animals and were also capable of bone marrow and spleen infiltration, strongly supporting their metastatic potential. Gene expression analysis revealed a reduced ability to undergo apoptosis, enhanced immune evasion and uncontrolled cell cycle progression in the CD44 negative cell subpopulation, further supporting their cancer-initiating identity.

The neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-SH was a kind gift from Dr Bonnet (Cancer Research UK, London) and was cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (all from Invitrogen, UK). NOD/ SCID animals were bred in house and maintained in microisolators under sterile conditions. Animals aged 8-12 weeks were conditioned with two intraperitoneal injections of 20 mg/kg Busilvex 48 h and 24 h prior to transplantation [17] . The indicated number of sorted SK-N-SH cells was mixed with Matrigel (BD Biosciences, Greece) at 1:1 ratio and injected subcutaneously on the right flank of each animal. Tumor growth was monitored over time and animals were sacrificed when tumor diameter reached 1.3 cm.
Neuroblastoma cells were stained with anti-human CD44-PE (clone 515) or -APC (clone G44-26) (both from BD Biosciences) that recognize the standard isoform of CD44. In addition, antibodies for CXCR4, CD24, CD29 (β1 integrin), CD49d (α4 integrin), CD49e (α5 integrin), CD106, CD54, CD58, GD2 (all from BD Biosciences) or N-cadherin (Sigma Aldrich, Greece) were used to stain the neuroblastoma cells. Secondary rat anti-mouse IgG2a FITC or IgG1 FITC antibodies were used for detection. Propidium iodide or 7-AAD (Sigma Aldrich) was used to determine cell viability. Samples were run on a Beckman Coulter FC500 flow cytometer and analysis was performed using CXP Analysis software (Beckman Coulter, USA).
Isolation of CD44 positive and negative SK-N-SH populations was performed by FACS sorting on a BD AriaI ™ (BD Biosciences) following staining with PEconjugated anti-human CD44 antibody (BD Biosciences). 7-AAD was used to exclude dead cells. Sorted populations were collected at >97% purity and were either injected the same day or cultured in vitro for further observation.
The two CD44 subpopulations were seeded in 6-well plates at 2×10 5 cells/well and 4-5 days later, the cells were detached using trypsin (Gibco) and counted on a hemocytometer using trypan blue exclusion. Half of the medium was replenished every 2 days. The cell doubling time between two time points was calculated using the equation:
where N and N 0 are the cell numbers at t and t 0 , respectively. At least 6 time points were calculated for each sorted CD44 cell population. We also measured the cell proliferation at various time points during in vitro culture cells by the CellTiter 96® Aqueous One Solution (Promega, UK) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Cells were plated at 10 4 per well in a 96-well plate, the solution added after 48-72 h and the OD490nm was read 2-4 h later.
On the day of sacrifice, single cell suspensions were obtained from the subcutaneous tumor, spleen and liver of the animals by passing minced tissue through a 100 μm cell strainer. Bone marrow cells were obtained by flushing the tibiae and femurs. Red blood cell lysis was performed in 0.7% NH 4 Cl and for the detection of neuroblastoma micrometastases, we performed PCR on phenol-chloroform-extracted DNA from the aforementioned tissues using human-specific primers for CART-1 (F: 5'-AAGGATACCACAATAAGCTGC-3'; R: 5'-GGTTTGTGGAGACTGGCAC-3'). Primers for mouse TNF-alpha (F: 5'-GGCTTTCCGAATTCACTGGAG -3'; R: 5'-CCCCGGCCTTCCAAATAAA -3') were used as a control. PCR conditions were 95°C for 5 min followed by 34 cycles of 95°C for 1 min, 60°C for 1 min, 72°C for 1 min. Analysis of PCR products was performed by agarose gel electrophoresis.
RNA from freshly sorted SK-N-SH cells was extracted using TRI Reagent (MRC, USA) and reverse transcription was performed using MMLV-RT (Promega) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Primer sequences for CD44 standard and variant isoforms and PCR conditions were as previously described [9] .
Real-time PCR was performed using 2xSYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Fermentas or Stratagene, UK). All samples were analyzed in duplicate 25μl reactions on an ABI Prism R 7000 Sequence Detector (Applied Biosystems, USA). Primers were as follows:
Total RNA was obtained from sorted CD44 positive or negative cells after in vitro culture, using TRI Reagent (MRC, USA). Further RNA purification and reverse transcription were performed according to SABiosciences' recommendations using the RT 2 qPCR-Grade RNA Isolation kit and RT 2 First Strand kit, respectively. Gene expression analysis in CD44 negative cells compared to the CD44 positive cell population was done using the Signal Transduction Pathway Finder Super Arrays (SA Biosciences, USA). Two biological replicates were tested for each CD44 cell population.
CD44 positive or negative SK-N-SH cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min at RT, followed by permeabilization with 0.2% Triton X100 for 30 min at RT. DNA staining was performed with propidium iodide (1.6 mg/ml) in the presence of 2.5 mg/ml RNase (Sigma) for 30 min at 37°C and analysis was performed on FC500 (Beckman Coulter). Similar protocol for cell cycle analysis was performed for cells treated with 3 nmol 5FU for 48 h. Data were analyzed by applying the appropriate DNA fit algorithm using FCS3 Express software (De Novo software, USA).

Staining of the SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cell line for the standard isoform of CD44 (CD44s) revealed a distinct CD44-expressing subpopulation which constituted approximately 40% of the total population ( Fig. 1 ). These cells had a distinct Forward and Side Scatter distribution by flow cytometry, indicating higher size and granularity compared to cells lacking the antigen (Fig. 1a) . In order to purify these two populations we FACS-sorted SK-N-SH cells based on their CD44s expression ( Fig. 1b-d) . Following in vitro culture we observed that the CD44 positive and negative cell populations were morphologically different, with the CD44 positive cells adopting a more flattened morphology (Fig. 1e ) compared to the smaller size and neuronal projections of the moderately attached CD44 negative cells (Fig. 1f) . During in vitro propagation we noticed that the growth of CD44 positive cells occurred at a faster pace with an estimated doubling time of 2.5± 0.6 days, compared to CD44 negative cells that divided every 4.1±1.4 days (p<0.04) (Fig. 1g) . This was supported by cell proliferation analysis measuring the formazan levels of live cells, which indicated a 60% slower proliferation rate of the CD44 negative cells relative to the CD44 positive cells over a period of 48-72 h (p<0.05) (data not shown). Collectively, these findings indicated that CD44 antigen expression identified two morphologically distinct neuroblastoma cell populations with different growth properties. To further investigate CD44 variant expression in these two subpopulations, we performed RT-PCR as previously described [9] . mRNA for the standard CD44 isoform was abundantly expressed by the CD44 positive SK-N-SH cells which also expressed traces of CD44 variants 3, 5, 6 and 9 (Fig. 1h) . Semi-quantitative estimation of the different transcripts indicated that CD44 variants 5 and 6 were expressed at approximately 30-fold lower levels, and variants 3 and 9 at 100-fold lower levels compared to the standard isoform (data not shown). CD44 negative cells did not express any mRNA of the standard isoform and only exhibited a 340 bp band for CD44 variant 9 at lower levels compared to CD44 positive cells. This low abundance of the variant 9 transcript was not considered to significantly affect the phenotype of CD44 negative cells. No expression of variants 7 or 8 could be detected in any of the CD44-sorted cell populations (data not shown).
To further characterize the cell surface profile of the CD44 positive and negative neuroblastoma cells we examined the expression of various adhesion molecules. The CD44 positive cells expressed two-fold higher levels of CD49d (α4 integrin), CD49e (α5 integrin) and CD29 (β1 integrin), and 4-fold higher levels of ICAM1 compared to the CD44 negative cells as determined by FACS Mean Fluorescence Intensity (MFI) (Fig. 2) . These findings may partly explain the higher adherence to tissue culture plastic and also the extended trypsin treatment required for this population to detach, compared to the CD44 negative cells (data not shown). In contrast, the CD44 negative cell population expressed higher levels of CD24 (MFI: 31.7) compared to the CD44 positive cells (MFI: 2.4), a molecule associated with high-risk neuroblastomas [18] . In addition, the CD44 negative cells express higher levels (MFI: 15.4) of the neural cell adhesion molecule NCAM which correlates with enhanced cell motility [19] and reduced adhesion to endothelial cells [20] . Therefore, the distinct cell adhesion profile of CD44 negative cells suggests an enhanced metastatic potential.
To investigate whether the standard isoform of CD44 can be used to isolate neuroblastoma cells capable of tumor development in vivo, the FACS-sorted CD44 positive and CD44 negative SK-N-SH cells (Fig. 1) were subcutaneously injected in NOD/SCID animals. To prevent clearance of antibody-labeled neuroblastoma cells via NK antibodymediated cell cytotoxicity in NOD/SCID animals [21] , CD44 sorted cells were cultured in vitro prior to transplan- (Table 1) . Regardless of the initial cell number inoculum (10 4 , 5×10 4 or 10 5 ), only 1/11 mice that received CD44 positive SK-N-SH cells developed a subcutaneous tumor (p=0.01 chi-square test). This finding indicated that the neuroblastoma cells capable of tumor formation in vivo lacked expression of CD44. This result is in accordance with reports associating the unfavorable prognosis of neuroblastoma with lack of CD44 expression [22] .
In order to test whether the phenotype of the transplanted cells had changed following tumor development, we analyzed for the presence of CD44 in the subcutaneous tumors. In all tumors examined, only a small fraction of cells (7.9±5.6%) were positive for CD44, indicating that CD44 expression had not changed considerably following inoculation (Fig. 3a) . Subsequently, we tested the ability of CD44 negative and CD44 positive cells to invade other tissues by performing genomic PCR for the presence of human CART-1 gene. We tested the bone marrow, spleen and liver of all transplanted animals with or without subcutaneous tumors. We could detect human cells in the bone marrow, spleen and liver in 40%, 33% and 57% respectively of animals transplanted with CD44 negative cells (Fig. 3b) . In contrast, only 10% of animals (1/10) that had received CD44 positive neuroblastoma cells, developed micrometastases in the bone marrow and liver 2-3 months post-transplantation. These findings clearly indicated that neuroblastoma cells lacking CD44 were capable of organ infiltration.
In order to molecularly characterize the CD44 negative and positive SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cells, we performed gene expression analysis using the Signal Transduction Pathway Finder Super Arrays (SA Biosciences). The CD44 negative cell population exhibited lower mRNA levels of the adhesion molecules VCAM1 (−28.56) and Fibronectin 1 (FN1 -14.08) compared to the CD44 positive cells, as well as ICAM1 (−51.13), further supporting the flow cytometry data depicted in Fig. 2 (Table 2) . Combined with the reduced integrin expression (Fig. 2) , these results indicated an overall diminished adhesion capacity of the CD44 negative cell population that may explain its metastatic propensity. Also the CD44 negative cells exhibited signs of reduced ability to undergo apoptosis, as they expressed higher levels of the NLR apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP +5.15) and lower levels of the apoptotic activators BCL-xL (−11.13), BAX (−2.65) and interferon regulatory Table 2 ). The elevated propensity of CD44 negative cells to progress through the cell cycle was verified by higher mRNA expression levels of CyclinA2 (+8.4), CDK2 (+5.7) and CDK4 (+1.95) by Quantitative Taqman PCR (Fig. 4a) . Cell cycle analysis of CD44 positive and CD44 negative cells under steady state revealed similar proportions of cells in the cell cycle phases (G1: 63±9% vs 56± 12%; S: 28±9% vs 36±11%; G2/M: 9±1% vs 8±3%) (Fig. 4b) . However, when we treated the cells with the drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), which induces a p53-mediated G1/S transition arrest, the CD44 positive neuroblastoma cells were retained in G1 (67%) and S (33%) phases, while the CD44 negative cells progressed through the cell cycle (G1: 36%; S: 40%; G2/M: 24%), clearly demonstrating the differential behavior of the two neuroblastoma cell populations to cytostatic drug treatment.
Neuroblastoma is a childhood tumor that originates from the neural crest and presents with clinical heterogeneity, ranging from aggressive metastatic tumors to tumors that spontaneously regress. The diverse clinical outcome, the variable metastatic profile and most importantly the susceptibility for disease relapse may be explained by the existence of a small cell population with stem cell-like properties. In the present study we used the SK-N-SH cell line [23] to investigate the potential role of the standard isoform of CD44 as a marker to distinguish neuroblastoma cells with tumor-initiating properties. The SK-N-SH cell line constitutes a good model for studying tumor-initiating cells as it contains the malignant neuroblastoma intermediate-type (I-type) cells [24] and a side population (SP) of cells capable of effluxing the Hoechst 33342 dye, a property associated with the neuroblastoma stem cell phenotype [5] . Recently the CD133+ SK-N-SH cell fraction was shown to be resistant to common chemotherapeutic drugs, a further indication to the presence of tumorinitiating cells in this cell line [25] . Neuroblastoma is generally characterized by phenotypic variability, and neuroblastoma cell lines contain clones of neuronal (N-type cells), substrate-adherent (S-type cells) and intermediate (I-type cells) cell phenotype, that exhibit variable differentiation and tumor formation ability [26] . CD44s expression is high in S-type cells [16, 27] and more variable in N-and I-type phenotypic subclones [28] . Given the extended literature on the characterization of these subclones, our CD44-sorted cell populations probably contain a mixture of all three cell types. However, we illustrate that CD44 can be used to further purify these phenotypic variants and to distinguish the in vivo neuroblastoma-initiating cells.
Gross and colleagues (2000) elegantly showed that in neuroblastoma enforced expression or amplification of Nmyc abrogates the function of CD44 and results in enhanced tumor formation, indicating the association between the two molecules [22] . We have verified that neuroblastoma cells negative for CD44 form tumors in vivo and have further shown that SK-N-SH cells lacking CD44 express higher levels of CD24. This provides further support to the malignant phenotype of the CD44 negative cell population, as CD24 has been associated with the tumor-initiating property of tumor spheres cultured from neuroblastoma bone marrow metastases [18] .
CD44s is a favorable prognostic factor in neuroblastoma [14, 15] and the epigenetic inactivation of CD44 expression through methylation has been reported as a potential culprit in the process of neuroblastoma development [29, 30] . In the xenograft model, inhibitors of DNA methylation as well as induction of CD44 expression suppress neuroblastoma growth [31] . Clinical studies have associated CD44 expression with low-stage differentiated neuroblastoma while high-risk aggressive tumors lack expression of this antigen [28] . In this study, we have demonstrated that CD44s can be used as a marker to isolate neuroblastoma cells capable of subcutaneous xenograft formation and organ infiltration in NOD/SCID animals; in addition we provide evidence that these tumors remained negative for CD44.
We verified that CD44 negative SK-N-SH cells did not express significant amounts of CD44 variant isoforms and showed that lack of CD44 expression was accompanied by lower levels of various adhesion molecules, including CD49d (α4 integrin), CD49e (α5 integrin) and CD29 (β1 integrin), as well as ICAM1 and NCAM. Such reduced adherence capacity may enhance the cells' migratory ability and their propensity to form metastases [19, 20] . Our in vivo data following subcutaneous neuroblastoma cell inoculation in NOD/SCID animals corroborate with such hypothesis. Although CD44 mediates the trans-endothelial migration of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells [32] , we found that the CD44 negative neuroblastoma cells were the ones that infiltrated the BM, spleen and liver of transplanted animals clearly showing that the metastatic ability of neuroblastoma cells is not dependent on CD44. CD44 negative SK-N-SH cells were readily detectable in bone marrow, spleen and liver up to 4 months following tumor cell inoculation. In contrast, CD44 positive neuroblastoma cells only formed subcutaneous tumors in 1/11 animals and could be detected in the BM and liver of 1/10 recipient animals. Our data contradicts a recent report showing that CD44 positive neuroblastoma cell lines (SK-N-SH, IMR32, Kelly) form metastases more efficiently than CD44 negative lines in a xenotransplantation model [33] without, however, accounting for the CD44 expression purity of the transplanted cells. We also molecularly characterized the tumorigenic CD44 negative neuroblastoma population by performing gene expression analysis to identify distinct pathways that differentiate CD44 negative from CD44-expressing SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cells. We found that cells lacking CD44 expressed lower levels of cell cycle inhibitors (p21 Cip1 , p16
, p15 INK4b ), and lower levels of the apoptotic activators NAIP, BCL-xL, BAX and IRF1, indicating uncontrolled cell cycle progression and resistance to apoptosis. In addition, 5-fluorouracil treatment prompted the CD44 negative cells to proceed to G2 contrary to the G1 cell cycle arrest seen in CD44 positive cells. A further property of cancer-initiating cells is the ability to evade host immunity during tumor establishment. CD44 negative neuroblastoma cells demonstrated such a profile by expressing reduced levels of the chemo-attractant CCL2 and the TNF receptor FAS [34, 35] .
Undoubtedly, demonstration of the tumor-initiating ability of the CD44 negative cells needs to be extended to patient samples and possibly in model systems allowing tumor formation by a single cell. Nonetheless, our findings are in accordance with neuroblastoma patient reports validating the prognostic value of CD44s expression. Identification of the phenotype of cancer-initiating cells has significant therapeutic implications. We reveal that the cells capable of neuroblastoma development in vivo contain a unique phenotypic and molecular profile which allows resistance to apoptosis, evade host immunity and undergo uncontrollable cell cycle progression. All these features not only unequivocally support the ability of the CD44 negative cell population to establish and propagate neuroblastoma in vivo, but also determine pathways for potential therapeutic intervention. 
Obesity, particularly abdominal obesity, is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Among women, the prevalence of abdominal adiposity increases after menopause and is associated with an increased risk for metabolic disease [1] .
Adipose tissue stores energy as triacylglycerols (TGs) in lipid droplets formed through lipogenesis, and fatty acids (FAs) are released from these stored TGs via lipolysis. Both processes are reportedly elevated in insulin-resistant individuals with obesity compared to insulin-sensitive individuals with obesity [2] . The cycle of lipid synthesis and degradation is required for the formation of diacylglycerols (DAGs) and free fatty acids (FFAs), which acts as regulatory ligands of nuclear receptors [3] . Elevated formation of FFAs and DAGs due to increased lipolysis in adipose tissue, may contribute to impaired intracellular insulin signaling, i.e., insulin resistance [2] .
TGs in adipose tissue primarily originate from FAs released from TG-rich lipoproteins following lipoprotein lipase (LPL)-mediated intravascular lipolysis [4] . LPL is
Purpose We studied effects of diet-induced postmenopausal weight loss on gene expression and activity of proteins involved in lipogenesis and lipolysis in adipose tissue. Methods Fifty-eight postmenopausal women with overweight (BMI 32.5 ± 5.5) were randomized to eat an ad libitum Paleolithic-type diet (PD) aiming for a high intake of protein and unsaturated fatty acids or a prudent control diet (CD) for 24 months. Anthropometry, plasma adipokines, gene expression of proteins involved in fat metabolism in subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) and lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity and mass in SAT were measured at baseline and after 6 months. LPL mass and activity were also measured after 24 months. Results The PD led to improved insulin sensitivity (P < 0.01) and decreased circulating triglycerides (P < 0.001), lipogenesis-related factors, including LPL mRNA (P < 0.05), mass (P < 0.01), and activity (P < 0.001); as well as gene expressions of CD36 (P < 0.05), fatty acid synthase, FAS (P < 0.001) and diglyceride acyltransferase 2, DGAT2 (P < 0.001). The LPL activity (P < 0.05) and gene expression of DGAT2 (P < 0.05) and FAS (P < 0.05) were thus considered a gatekeeper enzyme to play an important role in the initiation and development of obesity [4] . Released FAs can enter adipocytes via either passive diffusion or through diffusion facilitated by the major transport protein CD36 [2] .
Within a fat cell, FAs undergo a series of enzymatic reactions leading to their storage as TGs in lipid droplets. The final and likely rate-limiting step in TGs synthesis is catalyzed by diglyceride acyltransferase 2 (DGAT2) [5] . Fatty acid synthase (FAS) is an important factor in de novo lipogenesis in adipocytes, and is elevated in cases of obesity and in type 2 diabetes [6] . In cases of obesity, basal lipolysis may be elevated by increased production of proinflammatory factors such as TNF-α, increasing transcription of the rate-limiting enzyme adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) [7] . Moreover, lipolysis is controlled by a number of lipid droplet-associated proteins that influence droplet formation and stability [5] . In particular, perilipin1 is a key factor that protects TGs from hydrolysis by ATGL [7] .
White adipose tissue is not only an energy-storage organ, but also an endocrine organ secreting a variety of adipokines, acting in locally or systemically ways. Adipokines, including leptin, adipsin and adiponectin, have endocrine effects on insulin sensitivity; and leptin also affects energy homeostasis. The secretions of these adipokines are affected by fat storage but the effect of macronutrient content in the diet is not well studied.
A recent study comparing before and after menopause demonstrated that postmenopausal women showed an increased tendency to store TGs in subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT), associated with increased lipogenesis [8] . Thus, further studies regarding the putative reversibility of altered fat metabolism among postmenopausal women with overweight are of major interest.
We previously made a diet intervention with a 5-week ad libitum Paleolithic type diet (PD), characterized by a moderately increased intake of protein and high contents of monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). This diet profoundly decreased abdominal obesity, blood lipid levels, and increased hepatic insulin sensitivity among postmenopausal women with obesity [9] . More recently we made a study on postmenopausal women with obesity, which revealed that a PD had sustained effects on circulating TG levels [10] . Moreover, a PD has also been reported to improve glucose sensitivity, lipid profiles, and blood pressure among healthy sedentary humans without concomitant weight loss [11] .
Our hypothesis was that a diet-induced weight loss would affect the levels of adipokines, lipogenesis and lipolysis in postmenopausal women with obesity. We tested in this secondary analysis whether a PD with a high intake of unsaturated fat and a low intake of carbohydrates would have more pronounced beneficial effects on adipokines and key proteins in fat metabolism than a conventional prudent diet with a high carbohydrate content (CD).

A CONSORT flow diagram and additional details regarding inclusion criteria, dietary instructions, and procedures for anthropometry and dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry are described in a previous paper by Mellberg et al. [10] .
Briefly, 70 postmenopausal women (age 60.5 ± 5.6 years) with overweight or obesity (BMI, 27-41 kg/m 2 ) and normal fasting plasma glucose levels were randomized to an ad libitum Paleolithic-type diet (PD) or a prudent control diet (CD). Only women that had experienced at least 12 consecutive months without menstruation were included in the study. The CD followed the Nordic Nutrition Recommendations aimed to include 15 energy percent (E%) protein, 55 E% carbohydrates and 30 E% fat. The CD was based on high-fiber products, meat, fish, vegetables, fruits and low-fat dairy products. The PD aimed to include 30 E% protein, 30 E% carbohydrates, and 40 E% fat, with recommendations for a high intake of MUFAs and PUFAs, and a relatively low intake of carbohydrate. The PD was based on lean meat, fish, eggs, vegetables, fruits, berries, and nuts. Additional fat sources included avocado and rapeseed and olive oil used in food preparation and dressings. The PD excluded dairy products, cereals, added salt, and refined fats and sugar.
Throughout the entire intervention period, each group participated in a total of 12 group sessions led by dieticians. The group sessions gave information on the intervention diets and how to cook using recipes. They also included group discussions and information regarding dietary impacts on health and behavioral changes. During the first 6 months of the intervention, eight group sessions were held, followed by one group session every 3 months until the end of the intervention.
The present secondary analysis on fat metabolism included 58 women that had abdominal fat biopsies taken at baseline and after 6 months of dietary intervention. Dietary intake was assessed using 4-day (3 week days and 1 weekend day) estimated self-reported food records collected at baseline and monthly for 6 months. The reported food intake was converted to the estimates of energy and nutrient intake using the nutritional analysis package Dietist XP (version 3.0, Kost och Näringsdata AB, Bromma, Sweden) based on the food composition database of the Swedish National Food Administration (2008-03-06) [10] .
Physical activity was measured using the Actiheart ® monitor during a 7-day period, at baseline and at 6 months, concurrently with the self-reported food records. The study participants gave written informed consent, and the study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board at Umeå University. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials. gov as NCT00692536. Blood samples were obtained after overnight fasting at baseline and 6 months. Plasma glucose and lipid levels were analyzed using a Vitros 5.1FS automated chemistry analyzer (Vitros Slides; Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics, Johnson & Johnson, NJ, USA). FFAs were determined in serum following the ACS-ACOD method using a NEFA-HR kit (Wako, Neuss, Germany). Insulin sensitivity was calculated applying the homeostasis model assessment for insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) [12] . SAT was obtained by needle aspiration under local anesthesia (Xylocaine 10 mg/mL; Astra Zeneca, Södertälje, Sweden), as previously described [13] .
Total RNA was extracted from SAT biopsies using the RNeasy ® Lipid Tissue Mini kit and the RNA reversed transcribed using TaqMan ® reverse transcription reagents as previously described [14] . Relative quantification real-time PCR was performed using an ABI Prism ® 7000 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) with Universal PCR Master Mix 2X (Roche Molecular Systems) and TaqMan gene expression assays (Applied Biosystems) for DGAT2 (Hs01045913_m1), FAS (Hs01005622_ m1), LPL (Hs00173425_m1), ATGL (alias PNPLA2; Hs00386101_m1), Perilipin1 (alias PLIN; Hs00160173_ m1), CD36 (Hs01567185_m1) and LRP10 (Hs00204094_ m1). Reference genes were evaluated by comparing PPIA (Hs999999904_m1) and LRP10 within the full study cohort using the NormFinder algorithm, and calculated the %CV [15] . Accordingly, LRP10 appeared to be the most suitable gene. Accordingly, the expression levels of the target genes were normalized to LRP10. Due to the limited amounts of adipose tissue in the biopsies we could only analyze gene expression at baseline and after 6 months.
All samples from each subject were analyzed on the same plate in duplicate. To reduce interference from plate biases, subjects were paired and balanced according to diet, fat distribution, insulin sensitivity index, and blood pressure parameters. Samples/subjects were balanced and paired using a space-filling design from a principle component analysis model calculated based on the subjects' baseline characteristics [16] .
LPL activity and mass were measured in SAT as previously described [17] . The presented data are the mean values of three determinations. For LPL activity, 1 mU corresponds to the release of 1 nmol fatty acids per min. Samples taken at baseline, at 6 months and 24 months from the same individual were analyzed on the same day and in the same assay, to reduce inter-assay variability.
Serum concentrations of leptin, adipsin, and adiponectin were determined using the Bio-Rad human diabetes kit (Hercules, CA, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions, with the addition that all samples were centrifuged for 30 s at 11,000×g to remove any debris. All samples were assayed in duplicate and analyzed using the Luminex 200 Labmap system (Austin, TX, USA). Data were analyzed using Bio-Plex Manager software version 4.1.1 or 6.0 (Bio-Rad). Protein concentrations were interpolated from the appropriate standard curve. Mean %CV values were 4.0% for adiponectin, and 7.8% for adipsin and leptin.

We performed further sample comparison modeling using a multivariate data analysis strategy to elucidate interventionrelated effects on the whole fat metabolism profile. First, the data were inspected using principal components analysis (PCA) to detect potential outliers and clusters. Second, each individual's sample collected after 6 months of intervention was subtracted from its baseline sample and missing data excluded. At last, we applied a variant of orthogonal partial least squares analysis (OPLS) [18] , OPLS-effect projections (OPLS-EP) [19] . OPLS-EP extracts metabolic profiles based on paired analyses of individual effects, i.e., the dietary intervention effect. Because each subject acted as her own control, this strategy minimizes the influence from confounding factors, such as inter-individual variation [19] . The multivariate models were validated by calculating P values based on ANOVA from the cross-validated scores (CV-ANOVA). To ensure proper cross-validation groups and reduce the chance of creating an over-fitted model, special consideration was taken to keep the same participants in the same group. The multivariate confidence intervals presented here were based on jack-knifing [20] . OPLS-EP analyses were performed during weight loss (0-6 months) and weight maintenance (6-24 months).
General estimating equations (GEE) and linear regression analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics for Mac, Version 22.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). Data describing the anthropometrical and biochemical parameters are presented as mean ± SD. The sample size was estimated using power analysis based on changes in fat mass in a pilot study of postmenopausal women on a PD. It was estimated that 30 participants were needed in each group to achieve P < 0.05 with 80% power. The effects of diet over time were analyzed using separate multiple regression models, each including diet group, time, and the group-by-time interaction as predictors. Regression parameters were estimated using GEE, a method that tolerates some degree of between-group variance. An exchangeable correlation structure was used to model the dependence between repeated measurements within participants. Prior to analysis, dependent variables with a skewed distribution were transformed using natural logarithms. Outcome is presented as P values for the included factors and estimated marginal means, with corresponding 95% confidence intervals for each diet at each time-point. P value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Univariate linear regression analyses were used to identify and characterize the relationship between a dependent variable and an independent variable. Outcome was presented using P values for the included factor and the coefficient of correlation R.
A previous publication describes the results regarding anthropometry and metabolic functions, including circulating lipid levels and insulin sensitivity in all 70 participants [10] . This secondary analysis presents lipogenesis and lipolysis in adipose tissue in the 58 women with fat biopsies during the first 6 months of the study period. LPL mass and activity were analyzed at 24 months. Gene expression was not analyzed due to lack of fat tissue.
The OPLS analysis included the following variables: Fat distribution, blood lipids, insulin sensitivity, gene expression and activity levels of key proteins involved in lipogenesis and lipolysis, and adipokines ( Fig. 1) , at 6 months. We obtained a significant OPLS model only for the PD group (Fig. 1) . However, an additional analysis including both groups in the same OPLS model revealed identical patterns of the included variables for both diets as for the PD group alone (data not shown). This suggests that the PD group response on the included variables is more pronounced as compared to the CD group and that no new information is to be found when including both groups in the same model.
Sagittal abdominal diameter, android fat mass, and plasma TG levels decreased significantly, with android fat mass showing the most pronounced reduction. Insulin resistance (estimated by the HOMA-IR index) decreased significantly, with concomitant reductions of adipsin and leptin. With regards to lipogenesis and lipolysis, LPL activity showed the most pronounced reduction, followed by FAS, DGAT2, and LPL mass. We also detected a reduced expression of the ATGL gene, a key factor in intracellular lipolysis.

After 6 months of the intervention the PD group showed significantly larger reductions in body weight and sagittal abdominal diameter compared to the CD group (Table 1) . 
The reported energy intake decreased similarly in both groups, while physical activity levels remained stable ( Table 2 ). The reported intake of protein increased significantly more in the PD group compared to the CD group, but did not reach the target level of 30 E%. The PD group also reported a significantly higher intake of unsaturated FAs and cholesterol than the CD group (Table 2) . Compared to baseline, the PD group reported a significantly decreased intake of carbohydrates, which was significantly lower than that reported by the CD group ( Table 2 ). The intake ratio of fiber-to-carbohydrate increased in both groups and was more pronounced in the PD group compared to the CD Table 1 Changes of anthropometric data, serum lipids and adipokines in postmenopausal women with overweight at baseline and after 6 months of an intervention with an ad libitum Paleolithic-type diet (PD) or prudent control diet (CD)
Data are shown as mean ± SD. n = 23-25 for the CD group; n = 32-33 for the PD group. Different n within a group is due to missing samples and different n between groups is due to a higher dropout rate in the CD group. Regression parameters were estimated by generalized estimating equations Table 2 Changes of nutrient intake and physical activity in postmenopausal women with overweight at baseline and at 6 months of an intervention with an ad libitum Paleolithic-type diet (PD) or prudent control diet (CD)
Data are presented as mean ± SD. n = 23-25 for the CD group; n = 32-33 for the PD group. Different n within a group is due to missing samples and different n between groups is due to a higher dropout rate in the CD group. The regression parameters were estimated by generalized estimating equations 34 ± 3.6 10 ± 6.7 < 0.001 34 ± 3.8 − 2.5 ± 4.8 < 0.01 < 0.001 SFAs intake (E%) 13 ± 2.1 − 3.0 ± 3.2 < 0.001 13 ± 2.0 1.8 ± 2.5 < 0.001 NS MUFAs intake (E%) 13 ± 1.9 7.9 ± 4.0 < 0.001 13 ± 2.1 − 1.3 ± 2.4 < 0.01 < 0.001 PUFAs intake (E%) 5.5 ± 1. 17 ± 1.9 6.3 ± 2.9 < 0.001 17 ± 2.5 1.9 ± 2.7 < 0.001 < 0.001 group ( Table 2 ). The reported intake of monosaccharides and disaccharides remained stable over time in both groups.
Serum TGs decreased significantly more in the PD group compared to the CD group (Table 1) . Total serum cholesterol levels and LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) decreased in both groups, without differences between groups ( Table 1) . The levels of HDL cholesterol and FFA remained stable in both groups (Table 1 ). The HOMA-IR index decreased significantly in the PD group, without significant difference between diet groups (Table 1) .
The gene expressions of LPL and CD36 were significantly decreased in the PD group, but no between-group differences were found (Figs. 2a, 3a) . Expressions of DGAT2 and FAS decreased significantly more in the PD group compared to the CD group (P < 0.05 for both; Fig. 3b, c) . The expression of ATGL decreased significantly in both groups, with no differences between groups (Fig. 4a) . Perilipin1 mRNA levels were unchanged in both diet groups during the intervention (Fig. 4b) . LPL mass, and activity levels decreased significantly in the PD group after 6 and 24 months, and there were significant differences in changes of LPL activity between the diet groups at both 6 and 24 months (P < 0.05 for both; Fig. 2b, c) . Significant associations were found between the changed LPL activity and LPL mass at 24 months using is due to missing samples and different n between groups is due to a higher dropout rate in the CD group. The regression parameters were estimated using generalized estimating equations. Difference from baseline: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; difference in change between groups (diet × time effect) # P < 0.05 Within-group differences in n were due to missing samples and between-group differences in n were due to a higher dropout rate in the CD group. The regression parameters were estimated using generalized estimating equations. Differences from baseline: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; difference in change between groups (diet x time effect) # P < 0.05. DGAT2 diglyceride acyltransferase 2, FAS fatty acid synthase linear regression analyses for both the PD group (R = 0.73, P = 0.001) and the CD group (R = 0.61, P = 0.019).
Serum levels of leptin and adipsin decreased in both groups with no significant differences between groups (Table 1) . Adiponectin levels decreased in the CD group, without differences between groups (Table 1) .
Using linear regression analyses, we tested possible associations between the main outcomes related to adipose tissue fat metabolism (i.e., LPL, DGAT2, FAS, CD36 and ATGL gene expressions; LPL mass and activity) and sagittal abdominal diameter, diet intake (i.e., carbohydrates and PUFAs) or HOMA-IR/insulin.
In the PD group, a significant association at 24 months was found between changes in sagittal abdominal diameter and LPL activity (R = 0.47, P < 0.05) and at 6 months between sagittal abdominal diameter and gen expression of DGAT2 (R = 0.48, P < 0.001), FAS (R = 0.48, P < 0.05), CD36 (R = 0.25, P < 0.05), LPL mass (R = 0.36, P < 0.05) and LPL activity (R = 0.58, P < 0.001). There were also significant associations between reported intake of carbohydrate and gene expression of DGAT2 (R = 0.38, P < 0.01), FAS (R = 0.27, P < 0.05), CD36 (R = 0.25, P < 0.05) and for LPL mass (R = 0.33, P < 0.05) and LPL activity (R = 0.44, P < 0.01) at 6 months in the PD group. Furthermore, significant associations at 6 months were found in the PD group between reported intake of PUFA and gene expression of DGAT2 (R = 0.42, P < 0.001), FAS (R = 0.34, P < 0.01), and for LPL activity (R = 0.34, P < 0.05). Significant associations between LPL mass and HOMA-IR (R = 0.38, P < 0.05) and circulating insulin levels (R = 0.42, P < 0.05) were found at 6 months in the PD group. No significant associations were found in the CD group.
Previous studies have shown that an ad libitum PD with a high content of MUFA and PUFA, a relatively low intake of carbohydrate, and a high fiber-to-carbohydrate ratio can have major positive effects on metabolic balance, including increased glucose tolerance and decreased serum TGs [9, 10, 21, 22] . Our findings suggest that these beneficial effects of the PD can be partly mediated by decreased levels of lipogenesis-promoting factors in SAT. The OPLS analysis revealed that the most pronounced effects were on fat distribution factors, circulating TG levels, and adipose LPL activity within the PD group during the first 6 months of intervention.
The greatly reduced LPL activity in SAT in the PD group was paralleled by a decreased LPL mass. The trend was similar in the CD group, but less pronounced compared to the PD group. Earlier studies of the impact of weight loss on LPL activity in SAT show discordant results [23, 24] . In support of our present data, prior studies have shown reduced adipose tissue LPL activity after surgically induced weight loss in individuals with morbidly obesity [25] [26] [27] . Additionally, a study of postmenopausal women with overweight or obesity after a 6-month hypocaloric dietary intervention demonstrated that decreased LPL activity was associated with reductions in abdominal adiposity, total cholesterol, LDLs and TGs [28] . Accordingly, the PD group in the present study showed a more pronounced decrease in LPL activity, associated with greater reductions of abdominal adiposity compared to the CD group. The association between changes Within-group differences in n were due to missing samples and between-group differences in n were due to a higher dropout rate in the CD group. The regression parameters were estimated using generalized estimating equations. Differences from baseline: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. ATGL adipose triglyceride lipase, PLIN perilipin1 1 3
of LPL activity and sagittal abdominal diameter in the PD group was verified by both the linear regression analysis and multivariate analysis via OPLS. LPL in adipose tissue is predominantly regulated at the post-translational level by nutritional factors, such as fasting, glucose and insulin [4, 29, 30] . Insulin has effects also at the level of LPL gene transcription [31] . The significant decrease in LPL protein mass may be a consequence of the lower intake of carbohydrate and circulating insulin, which were significantly associated to LPL mass in the PD group at 6 months. The PD group also showed a significantly decreased expression of CD36, which could reduce FA uptake and utilization [32] . The expression of CD36 is upregulated by insulin, and the expression in adipose tissue is also upregulated in obesity and in type 2 diabetes patients [33] . Genetic studies have revealed that variations within the CD36 locus are associated with metabolic dysfunction through effects on whole-body adiposity [34] . From a metabolic perspective, partial CD36 deficiency is associated with a beneficial phenotype, such that the CD36 reduction in the PD group was associated with decreased abdominal adiposity at 6 months in the PD group [35] . Furthermore, the expression of the important lipogenic enzyme DGAT2 decreased significantly more in the PD group compared to the CD group. Gene expression of DGAT2 is downregulated in adipocytes by weight reduction in humans and is regulated by nutritional factors such as glucose and PUFAs [36] [37] [38] . Carbohydrate and PUFA intake were associated with DGAT2 gene expression in the PD group at 6 months and may explain the more pronounced decreased DGAT2 expression found in this study group.
Both diet groups showed decreased expression of the lipogenic enzyme FAS. De novo lipogenesis through FAS in the liver is upregulated by glucose, fructose and insulin, and are downregulated by a high-fat diet and possibly by PUFAs [6] . The expression of FAS in the adipose tissue was more strongly influenced in the PD group than in the CD group, possibly due to the reduced carbohydrate content and/or increased PUFA content in the PD, and/or by the decreased circulating insulin levels in the PD group [6] . This is supported by the association between intake of PUFA and carbohydrates to FAS expression at 6 months in the PD group. Notably, the regulatory responsiveness of FAS in adipose tissue is less pronounced than in liver [6] .
Both diet groups showed decreased expression of the ATGL gene, indicating reduced intracellular lipolysis of stored TGs. This finding is consistent with earlier weight-loss studies in humans with obesity following a hypocaloric diet, suggesting that weight loss per se determines this reduction of gene expression [39, 40] . Activation and recruitment of lipases such as ATGL to the lipid droplet surface are regulated by perilipin 1 [41] . We did not find any changes in perilipin 1 gene expression. The explanation for this unaltered expression may be regulation on the protein level by phosphorylation. Importantly, an overall reduction of basal lipolysis in adipose tissue may lower the risks of ectopic fat storage and reduced insulin sensitivity in other tissues, such as skeletal muscle [42] .
The PD group showed an improved metabolic situation manifested by increased insulin sensitivity, as indicated by a decreased HOMA-IR index, and lower circulating leptin and adipsin levels. Leptin represses food intake and increases energy expenditure, and is elevated in women with a metabolic syndrome, likely due to leptin resistance or "hypothalamic leptin insufficiency" [43, 44] . Increased levels of adipsin are reported in postmenopausal women with obesity, and have been suggested to be important for the development of a metabolic syndrome in this patient group [43] . While earlier studies have reported stable or increased adiponectin levels during weight reduction in postmenopausal women [45, 46] , the CD group in our present study showed a significant decrease in serum adiponectin levels. The differences between groups may be due to different intake of FFAs that may affect PPARγ, an obligatory transcription factor for adiponectin. Notably, we analyzed total adiponectin levels in blood, while the high-molecular-weight form of adiponectin is considered the most etiologically important component with regards to metabolic effects [47] .
The strengths of this study include a relatively low total dropout rate and the relatively long intervention time. The higher dropout rate in the CD group, largely due to lack of motivation, may have influenced the between-group differences in weight reduction and body composition. Since LPL activity and mass was expressed per g adipose tissue, and the fat cell size is expected to decrease on weight loss due to the reduced content of TG, we may have underestimated the reduction of LPL in adipose tissue. There was no energy restriction but the energy intake decreased in both groups equally at 6 months. A constant energy intake is preferable when evaluating the impact of the macronutrient change on metabolism. Finally, the present study participants were relatively healthy. Future interventions should include subjects with different degrees of metabolic dysfunction, and also include measurements of fat cell size.
Our present results show that a PD, high in PUFAs and low in carbohydrates, has a more pronounced effect on adipose tissue lipid metabolism than a CD by reducing gene expression of DGAT2 and FAS at 6 months and decreasing LPL activity at 24 months despite similar weight loss. This is linked to improved insulin sensitivity at 6 months and a more pronounced reduction of circulating TGs, suggesting that a PD may be a promising tool to decrease cardiovascular risk in healthy postmenopausal women with overweight.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is known as the most common form of dementia and is a progressive neural disorder, characterized by memory loss and severe impairment of other intellectual capabilities (Thompson et al., 2012) . AD is connected with the reduced level of acetylcholine (Ach) and loss of cholinergic neurons in the brain (Lane et al., 2006) . Ach was the first discovered neurotransmitter that, transfers neural signal at all autonomic ganglia including neuromuscular junction and synapses in the central nervous system. In autonomic nervous system the neurotransmission of signal is governed by Ach between the preganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons. It is also responsible for stimulation of muscles, which include the muscles of gastro-intestinal muscles. The loss of function of Ach is implicated to the development of AD (Perry et al., 1999) . The AChE, an enzyme that breaks the neurotransmitter Ach into acetate and choline, hampers the normal neurotransmission. Cholinergic hypothesis of the disease states that the inhibition of AChE action may be one of the realistic approaches to the symptomatic management of AD (Weinstock, 1995) . Acetylcholinesterase acts as one of the most significant targets against AD (Giacobini, 2004) . Some of the known inhibitors of AchE are donepezil, galantamine tacrine, huperzine, and 7-methoxytacrine (Mirjana et al., 2013) .
5, 7-Dihydroxy-4'-methoxy-8-prenylflavanone (1), isobavachalcone (2) and 5-hydroxy-7, 8-(2, 2-dimethylchromano)-4'-methoxyflavanone (3) (Figure 1 ), isolated for the first time from the leaves of Artocarpus anisophyllus Miq. (Lathiff et al., 2015) , were selected for the present in silico bioactivity analysis. Artocarpus anisophyllus is a Malaysian plant, found in the lowland forests of Negeri Sembilan and Johor States of Malaysia, Sumatra and Philippines. This midcanopy tree is locally known as "keledang babi" in Peninsular Malaysia or "mentawa" in Borneo. The Artocarpus species are rich in phenolic compounds especially prenylated and pyranoflavonoids with various bioactivities including antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antiproliferative, anticholinergic, acetylcholinesterase (AchE) inhibitory and tyrosinase inhibitory activities (Arung et al., 2006; Fang, et al., 2008; Lin et al., 2009; Ma et al., 2010; Okoth et al., 2013; Somashekhar et al., 2013) . Compound 1 is inactive towards DPPH free radicals, but possesses significant tyrosinase inhibitory activity (Lathiff et al., 2015) . In this present work, the bioactivity of the isolated compounds was studied in silico using several screening methods, which include drug likeness, ADME/Tox screening, molecular docking and QSAR. The goal of the study was to establish protocols to find out suitable target for the compounds in AD, and to check whether the isolated compounds could act as a better option for inhibition of AchE. After identifying the suitable target for the isolated compounds in silico, in vitro activity of these compounds was studied using bioactivity staining method (Ellman's method) for validating the in silico findings. 

The isolation and characterization of the flavonoids were achieved by vacuum liquid chromatography (VLC), gravity column chromatography (CC), 1D and 2D NMR, FTIR, UV, MS and by direct comparison with literature data (Lathiff et al., 2015) .
In the present study, ligands are the compounds isolated from the A. anisophyllus (Figure 1 ). Their structures were drawn with the ChemDraw Ultra 8.0 software and then the structures were converted to 3D structures of 'smiles' and 'sdf' formats with software viz. OpenBabel.
For ADME/Tox screening of the selected ligands, Mobyle@rpbs online portal (Lagorce et al., 2008) was used. Molsoft L. L. C. online portal (www.molsoft.com) was used to screen the drug likeness of the compounds.
In computer-aided drug designing, drug target search is an essential part of the work. A probable target for these selected compounds in relation to AD was anticipated with the help of PharmMapper (Figure 3 ). Of the flavonoids (Figure 1 ), only compound 1 showed any activity towards the expected target for AD, and the rest were discarded as they were inactive towards the target. For docking study the 3D structure of the target protein was obtained from Protein Data Bank (http://rcsb.org/pdb).
Molecular docking was performed using FlexX of Biosolveit LeadIT with 5,7-Dihydroxy-4'-methoxy-8-prenylflavanone (1) and the target, and a separate docking was also performed with the target and known inhibitors to compare the efficacy of 1. Docking results i.e., docking energy, docked amino acid residues, hydrogen bond, and bond energy were recorded using LeadIT.
The QSAR analysis was performed by taking 21 known inhibitors (Table 1 ). The QSAR descriptors viz. Molar Refractivity, Index of Refraction, Surface Tension, Density, Polarity and LogP were generated for each of the molecule using ACD ChemSketch software. The activities were measured by taking the inverse logarithm of IC50 values. The descriptors were tabulated in a MS Excel sheet against their bioactivities (log IC50 -1 ). The descriptors and activities were loaded in Easy QSAR software for multiple linear regression analysis. From the regression, the QSAR equation was generated and the activity of 5, 7-dihydroxy-4'-methoxy-8-prenylflavanone was predicted.
Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry Specification (SMILES)
3,4,5-Trihydroxy-benzoic acid 2-(3,4-dihydroxy-phenyl)-5,7-dihydroxy-chroman-3-yl ester
In vitro activity AchE inhibitory activity of three flavonoids isolated from A. anisophyllus was assessed using the AchE inhibition assay using TLC with bioactivity staining based on the Ellman's method developed by (Rhee et al., 2003) . Detection limit was established by applying nine spots with various concentrations (2000, 1000, 500, 250, 125, 62.5, 31.25, 15.62 and 7 .81 µg/mL) onto the TLC plate. The concentration that produced a spot with the least observable whiteness after being sprayed with mixtures of acetylthiocholine iodide as substrate, Ellman's reagent and AChE enzyme solution was the detection limit. Detection limit is defined as the minimum concentration where the white spot is visible by eye (Rhee et al., 2001) .
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitory activity AD is characterized by the loss of memory function that hampers the normal living and also the intellectual ability of the brain. During neural transmission the Ach breaks down into acetyl and choline by AchE on the post synaptic membrane. This degradation of Ach breaks the normal nervous transmission in the synaptic cleft and leading to the development of cholinergic AD symptoms. Restoring the damage caused by AchE can block the occurrence of AD and that can be gained through the inhibition of AchE function. Inhibitors of AchE or anti-cholinesterase prevent the breakdown of Ach and in turn maximize both level and duration of neurotransmitter action. In the present study, 5, 7-dihydroxy-4'-methoxy-8-prenylflavanone (1) was identified as an AchE inhibitor. The in silico study was performed to check whether the selected compound could target the AchE more efficiently than the other inhibitors or drugs presently available in the market. There are a few drugs, e.g., donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine, tacrine, huperzine, and 7-methoxytacrine, available in the market, (Mirjana et al., 2013) . Donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine are regarded as the phase-4 drugs (Mangialasche et al., 2010) , and known as the most effective cholinergic drugs. Use of these medications was approved by regulatory organizations such as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) to treat the mental manifestations of AD and to improve life quality of the patients (Birks, 2006; Hyde et al., 2013) . Though these drugs were approved by various regulatory agencies, those still display several side effects. The use of tacrine has been abandoned because of several side effects including hepatotoxicity (Watkins et al., 1994; Birks et al., 2009 ) and donepezil antagonistic effects include diarrhoea, anorexia, abdominal pain, gastrointestinal anomalies-nausea, as well as an increase in cardiac vagal tone causing bradycardia (Tayeb et al., 2012) . Adverse effects of rivastigmine are consistent with the cholinergic actions of the drug, and include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, anorexia, headache, syncope, abdominal pain and dizziness (Inglis, 2002; Birks et al., 2009) . Galantamine, huperzine and 7-methoxytacrine also show similar type of toxicities (Birks, 2006) . However, compared to other AChE inhibitors, huperzine shows better permeation through blood-brain-barrier has higher oral bioavailability and longer AChE inhibition (Ebrahimi et al., 2012) . Considering the clinical effects of all the marketed drugs, there is no indication that any of these medicines is superior to other in efficacy (Tayeb et al., 2012) . The current study was about searching a potential inhibitor with higher efficiency than the marketed drugs for AD. In this connection, the in silico establishment of the isolated compound 1 was studied and it was validated by in vitro study against acetylcholinesterase.
In silico study involved ADME/Tox screening, drug likeness prediction, target prediction, molecular docking and QSAR analysis. ADME/Tox screening is the initial step for selection of potential drug molecule, which helps in predicting the in vivo behaviour of such compound (Yu and Adedoyin, 2003) . To be an efficient lead molecule, it should follow some basic criteria -viz, drug molecule must be bioavailable (absorption), distributed to the particular site of action, metabolically active (non-toxic) and should be eliminated from the body (Wan, 2013) . ADME/Tox screening can be performed through online web server like FAF-Drugs3 maintains under the Mobyle@rpbs, OSIRIS Property Explorer, ADMET Predictor, ADMET Modeler etc. In the present context, compound 1 was found nontoxic i.e, could sustain the standard for absorption, digestion, metabolism and excretion in FAF-Drugs3 screening and also followed the drug likeness properties in the Molsoft (Figure 2 ) described by the Lipinski Rule of 5 (RO5). Molecules maintaining the Lipinski Rule of 5 are mainly orally administered drugs (Lipinski, 2004 ). The RO5 demonstrate mainly four physicochemical properties of a molecule to become a drug likely Molecular weight (MW) should be ≤ 500, logP ≤ 5, H-bond donors ≤ 5 and H-bond acceptor ≤ 10. Poor absorption, bioavailability and solubility is observed if a molecule shows MW more than 500 (Miteva et al., 2006) . However, in exceptional cases fulfilling the RO5 does not guarantee that a molecule is drug like. Moreover, it provides an idea about the solubility and oral bioavailability of a compound. Following the Lipinski Rule of 5, compound 1 showed molecular weight as 354.40 Dalton, logP value 4.64, H-bond donor 2, and H-bond acceptor 5.
The findings pointed that, compound 1 has drug like properties with drug likeness model score 1.28 (Lipinski et al., 1997) and this can be an orally active drugs. Based on its physicochemical parameters shown in Rule of 5 it could be water soluble, permeable through intestine and orally bioavailable (Lipinski, 2004) . Molecular docking with FlexX was performed between ligand and the target along with some known inhibitors including a few drug molecules available in the market. In this approach, the ligand is allowed to interact with the specific target and it is the basic step of Ligand Based Drug Design (LBDD) method (Acharya et al., 2011) . Docking involves an algorithm of molecular interactions (intermolecular interaction) between the ligand and the specific target. Ligand molecule interacts with the target at specific binding site by searching favourable conformation of the protein. The ligand target binding is determined by mode of bonding between the amino acid residues of the target protein and the ligand molecule. Molecular docking furnishes quantitative prediction of binding energetics and also provides the ranking (score) of docked compounds on the basis of binding affinity of ligand-target complex (Huang and Zou, 2010) . The binding energetics mainly based on the hydrogen -bonding pattern of amino acid residues and ligand molecule. Autodock, DOCK, GOLD, FlexAID, HYBRID and idock etc. are some other softwares for performing molecular docking. The docking study showed that the ligand-target binding complex for 1 (Figure 4 ) was more significant than that with the phase-4 drugs except donepezil and also few known inhibitors shown higher docking score than the molecule 1. The score shown by compound 1 and donepezil was -13.5762 and -15.4974 respectively; other inhibitors' scores were within the ranges from 1.0000 to -23.4139 (Table 2) . QSAR models describe the relationship between a chemical structure and biological activities in a set of chemicals and based on this, it also predicts the activity of new chemicals. QSAR software predicts the biological activity based on statistical calculation such as regression analysis. Prediction of biological activities is achieved quantitatively as a concentration of a chemical substance required to express a biological response. Easy QSAR, cQSAR, QSARPro. and McQSAR etc. are some of the softwares for prediction of structure activity relationship. In the QSAR assay by Easy QSAR software, significant correlation with R square value of 73.55% was found. The Rsq value should be definitely high for a good QSAR equation, higher Rsq means higher fitting of the equation to the given data, hence better predictions it would provide for new test data. The Adjusted Rsq was 61.34%; therefore, the difference between Rsq and adjusted Rsq was less. High difference in Rsq and Adjusted Rsq indicates weaker overall prediction. The F statistics of the test was 6.02 and the critical F was 2.63. The F statistics of the test should be greater than Critical F, otherwise the generated equation is inefficient. The multiple regression plots (linear) for 21 AChE inhibitors are shown in (Figure 5 ). From the above QSAR equation the IC50 value of 5, 7-dihydroxy-4'-methoxy-8-prenylflavanone (1) was predicted as 1659.59 nM. Validating the in silico result, an in vitro investigation on AchE inhibitory activity showed compound 1 as one of the AchE inhibitors with the detection limit of 125 µg/mL for inhibiting AChE enzyme and that of the positive control, galantamine hydrobromide was 7.81 µg/mL. Compound 1 was clearly an inhibitor of AChE, but it was less efficient than the standard. As a result, a family of 100 derivatives was prepared from the parent compound 1, and again molecular docking was performed to get the higher efficiency compound. Several derived compounds showed much higher efficiency towards the target than that of donepezil, compound 1 and known inhibitor. In docking analysis, the compound 20 exhibited (score -31.6392) the highest efficiency towards the target binding site to form a stable configuration of ligand-target complex (Figure 6 ) to inhibit the activity of AchE. The IC50 value of this derivative was predicted as 6.025 nM from the QSAR study and it was much less than that of the parent compound. So, compound 20 might act as the efficient inhibitor of AchE (Mirjana et al., 2013) . AchE pathway is one of the pathways leading to Alzheimer's disease (Perry et al., 1999) . If compound 20 blocks the AchE activity during neurotransmission, the AchE pathway leading to Alzheimer's disease can potentially be blocked. Further synthesis and in vitro and in vivo analyses are required to establish the AchE inhibition activity of compound 20. 
The Chernobyl accident occurred in April 1986 (1, 2) . Radiation events such as the atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki reportedly have not yielded genetic defects (3) (4) (5) . Recently, Dubrova et al. (6) reported germline mutation at human minisatellite loci that were studied among children born in heavily polluted areas of the Mogilev district of Belarus after the Chernobyl accident. Baker et al. (7) also found high levels of genetic mutations in rodents in the vicinity of Chernobyl. Ranmaiya et al. (8) presented a comparative estimation of the frequencies of genetic disorders induced in germ cells of male mice by a single or long-term exposure to incorporated 137Cs or to external gamma radiation. The accident at the Chernobyl power plant created a different type of long-term exposure to low radiation doses (P Montague, unpublished data), although Bauchinger et al. (9) report that there is no absolute definition of a small dose of ionizing radiation. In terms of microdosimetry concepts, it can be assumed that biological effects are caused predominantly by one or two charged particles (10) .
The primary goal of this research was to reveal molecular genetic changes (e.g., de novo mutations) that occurred in individuals exposed to ionizing radiation in the Chernobyl area. About 180,000 repatriates were living in the significantly contaminated region. The analysis involved DNA isolated from unrelated individuals and families (both offspring born before and after the disaster and their parents). Because of the small size of the experiment and control samples, tools enabling simultaneous testing of hundreds of genomic regions must be used. DNA fingerprinting based on mini-or microsatellite markers may be a suitable molecular genetic tool to address this problem.
Several molecular genetic methods for genome screening have been proposed for mutation detection (11, 12) . Genomic analysis based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) appears to be the most promising technique for high sensitivity analysis (13) . Recent advances in PCR applications make it possible to score individuals at a large number of loci. DNA fingerprinting by inter-simple sequence repeat (SSR) PCR can be used to identify the presence of the repeated elements targeted by the primers and to evaluate their distribution within different genomes. The examination of the amplification products of DNA from different individuals of the same species (including human) makes it possible to identify some individual-specific differences. These intraspecies polymorphisms open the possibility of using inter-SSR PCR as a system of multiple-locus DNA markers (14) . random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) is an attractive complement to the conventional DNA fingerprinting (14) . RAPD includes the ease and rapidity of analysis, the use of a general set of universal primers, and a minimal amount of DNA. The profile of amplification products depends on the template-primer combination. The amplification products usually are resolved on agarose gels, whereas polymorphisms serve as dominant genetic markers, which are inherited in a Mendelian fashion (14, 15 These three control families were screened with the aforementioned primers. Highquality DNA was extracted from the blood samples according to protocol of John et al, (16) . Internal control within families (children born before and after the accident) guaranteed that the results obtained were reliable and allowed discrimination between somatic and germline sources of new bands (see "Discussion").
Two PCR methods were used in our study: AP PCR and RAPD PCR. The separation of the amplification products was conducted using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and silver staining (SS 
New bands were detected in some children of the irradiated families, as compared to their parents' band pattern. Only children bomrn after the disaster manifest this pattern.
In the 13 families studied (with one offspring born before the disaster and one after) new bands were detected only in the child born after the exposure of the parent to radiation. New bands were also revealed in families with only one offspring born after the disaster (Table 1) . The same primers were used to screen DNA samples of the control families not exposed to radiation. In total, 37 new bands were detected in the offspring who were born in nonexposed areas (after the parents' employment as liquidators ended). No such bands appeared either in the children born in the same family before the accident or in the children of control families who had not been exposed to radiation (Figure 1) . Changes in the DNA profiles were tested for reproducibility and confirmed in three independent PCR runs. The results with microsatellites show the bands detected in the children born after the explosion (Figure 2 ).
Lee and Chang (13) (6) . Hence, the possibility of detection of these changes in this study was enhanced by a large number of genome sites (about 3270 in all) amplified using the selected set of about 100 PCR primers (out of 400 primers screened).
The results presented here consistently demonstrate the appearance of new bands in children born after the exposure, as compared to their siblings. In contrast to the experiment results, no new bands appeared in the control families in children born after 1986. An important question related to the interpretation of these results is the nature of the new bands. Are they a manifestation of somatic changes in the tested children or are they changes that occurred in the germline cells of the parent(s) and were transferred to the next generation through the gametes? It would be premature to argue that we have a final answer to this question. Nevertheless, our strategy in establishing the tested material, by using siblings born before and after parental exposure to radiation, allows us to assume rather confidently that the new bands are a manifestation of genetic changes in the germline. Indeed, we could take the opposite assumption-that the origin of the registered changes is somatic mutation in the tested children, e.g., because they lived in the contaminated territory. But how could we then explain the absence of such changes in their siblings born before the accident who were subjected to the same environmental conditions during the same period and even before? If environment were the inducing factor, then one would expect these children to manifest the same phenomenon as well. The fact that this is not the case supports our contention that the new bands reflect genetic changes in the germline. Moreover, this consideration explains why it was so important to use the proposed family structure for this project.
These results point to a possible influence of low-dose radiation stress on the genetic material. We increased the number of families tested and we plan to increase the number of controls. We also tested a new PCR technique, the inverse sequencetagged repeats method in collaboration with W Rohde from Max Planck Institute in Koln, Germany (19) . Future plans include identification of de novo mutations in the unrelated liquidators, using the monomorphic markers identified in previous screens. Current work includes cloning of the new bands detected in the progeny of liquidator parents, with subsequent sequencing, to assess their molecular nature.
In a recent US national survey of 43,093 adults, the number of individuals identified with past-year and lifetime DSM-IV diagnoses (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) of pathological gambling disorder (PG) was only 74 (0.17%) and 185 (0.43%), respectively (Slutske, 2006) . As it is currently defined, PG is no more prevalent than schizophrenia or anorexia nervosa. One of the greatest challenges to conducting community-based twin studies of PG is the fact that it is not especially prevalent.
In the book A Mug's Game: A History of Gaming and Betting in Australia, John O'Hara (1988) begins by stating that 'Australians have long thought of themselves as a nation of gamblers ... The belief that typical Australians would bet on two flies crawling up a wall is part of our folklore ' (p. ix) . Regulated forms of gambling have been more widely available for a much longer time in Australia than in the United States. For example, the first state government-operated lottery was established in 1920 in Australia (in Queensland; Australasian Gaming Council, 2008) compared to 1964 in the United States (in New Hampshire; National Research Council, 1999) , and electronic gambling machines have been legally available outside of casinos in New South Wales (where about one-third of the Australian population resides) since 1956, and with the exception of Western Australia, from the 1990s in all other states and territories (Australasian Gaming Council, 2008) .
The average Australian adult spent over AUD $1100 on gambling in 2008 (Australasian Gaming Council, 2008) . The 1999 Australian Productivity Commission reported that 'While international gambling statistics are patchy, evidence suggests that Australians are amongst the biggest gamblers in the world ' (p. 3.2) . The average per capita gambling expenditure as a percentage of net disposable income in 2003 was estimated for 21 industrialized nations (Pryor, 2008) -Australia ranked first and the United States ranked 14th among the countries included, with 5.85% and 1.75% of their average per capita net disposable incomes spent on gambling, respectively.
The density of gambling venues in Australia is also quite likely the highest in the world. Australia reportedly has the highest per capita number of highintensity gaming machines (known as pokies in Australia, slot machines in the United States, fruit machines in the United Kingdom, and VLTs in Canada) in the world. Estimates of the percentage of worldwide gaming machines that are found in Australia vary somewhat -one source has suggested that Australia accounted for about 3% of machines worldwide, and about 7% of 'casino-style' gaming machines (Australian Gaming Council, 2004; Australasian Gaming Council, 2008) , whereas another source has suggested that Australia accounted for 20% of the world's high-intensity gaming machines (Australians account for less than 1% of the world's population; Productivity Commission, 1999; see Table  1 ). Most of the Australian population lives within close proximity to gaming machines, which are distributed widely throughout the community in Australia in licensed premises: clubs, hotels and casinos. For these reasons, Australia may be the ideal setting for conducting a community-based twin study of PG, because along with the advantage afforded by the greater gambling involvement observed among Australians, it also allows for an examination of the genetic influence on PG susceptibility in a culture in which most individuals have been heavily exposed to gambling opportunities in relatively mature market segments.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that gambling involvement and problems run in families (e.g., Black et al., 2006; Gambino et al., 1993) . For example, in a recent family study, Black et al. (2006) found that 8% of the first-degree relatives of PGaffected probands, compared to 2% of the first-degree relatives of PG-unaffected controls, had a lifetime history of PG. Many experts attribute the familial transmission of gambling and PG to social modeling influences (e.g., Gupta & Derevensky, 1997) , but this conclusion is based upon the observation of parentoffspring transmission in nuclear families, which could be due to genetic as well as environmental factors. The role of a possible underlying biological diathesis in the development of PG has not been ignored by researchers; in fact, the search for putative indicators of biological vulnerability for PG (e.g., Blanco et al., 1996; Carrasco et al., 1994; Roy et al., 1988 ) and specific susceptibility genes associated with PG (e.g., Comings et al., 1996; Comings et al., 1997) actually preceded the behavioral genetic research documenting the importance of genetic influences on the risk for PG (see Lobo & Kennedy, 2006 for a review).
The behavioral genetic literature on PG is scant, consisting of a single study. Eisen et al. (1998) studied 3,359 twin pairs from the Vietnam Era Twin Registry, a national sample of male twin pairs in which both men served in the United States military during the Vietnam Era. Despite the large size of the Vietnam Era twin cohort, there were still relatively few men who met the DSM-III-R criteria (American Psychiatric Association, 1987) for PG when interviewed in 1991-93. Of 7,869 interviewed men, only 112 met the DSM-III-R criteria for PG , and there were only 6 monozygotic (MZ) and 2 dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs concordant for DSM-III-R PG. Nonetheless, the lifetime prevalence of PG was significantly elevated among the MZ (23%) and DZ (10%) co-twins of men with PG compared to the lifetime prevalence of PG in the full sample (1.4%). When standard twin structural equation models were fit to the data, it was not possible to discern whether this familial similarity for PG was due to genetic or environmental factors (Eisen et al., 1998) . In a combined (and more powerful) bivariate analysis of PG and alcohol dependence, Slutske et al. (2000) found that 64% of the variation in the risk for PG could be accounted for by genetic factors, with the remaining variation accounted for by individual-specific environmental factors or errors of measurement. Family environmental factors did not significantly contribute to variation in PG (although these factors may still be important in either mediating genetic effects, or in their interaction with an existing genetic predisposition). The results of this study suggest that PG is as heritable as alcohol dependence, and that genetic factors, rather than social modeling, predominantly explain the familial transmission of PG. In a 10-year follow-up of the Vietnam Era twin cohort, Xian et al. (2007) found that the same genetic factors accounted for variation in liability for problem gambling at both the baseline and at the 10-year follow-up and that the estimates of heritability at the two time points were similar (baseline: 49%; follow-up: 58%). The results of this follow-up study suggest that the changes in the availability of gambling that occurred in the United States between 1992 and 2002 did not alter the underlying genetic architecture of the liability to problem gambling. The extent to which the results from the Vietnam Era twin study generalize to women has still not been established. The behavioral genetic literature on (nonpathological) gambling involvement is also nearly nonexistent. The first twin study of gambling involvement comes from the landmark National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test (NMSQT) twin study (Loehlin & Nichols, 1976) . Twins were identified among high school juniors in the United States who were taking the 1962 NMSQT. The twins were subsequently invited to participate in a study, and an extensive mailed survey was completed by 850 pairs. Included in the survey were four questions about the frequency of participation (frequently, occasionally, or not at all) in gambling in the past year. Because these data appear to be at risk of forever falling through the cracks, they have been retabulated and are presented here in Table 2 .
What is especially noteworthy about the NMSQT twin study is that it was conducted in 1963, during a period in the United States when there were no casinos outside of Nevada, the first legal lottery had not yet been established, and there were few opportunities for legal gambling. Nonetheless, a substantial portion of these 17-18 year old students had participated in gambling activities in the past year (see Table 2 ) -these would invariably have been in the form of unregulated or illegal gambling. The results of this twin study represent a rare glimpse into the sources of variation in individual differences in gambling in a prohibitive (versus the currently more permissive) gambling environmental context. With the exception of card gambling among young men, a comparison of the correlations obtained among MZ versus DZ twins suggests little evidence for an important genetic influence and some evidence of shared family environmental influences on variation in the frequency of gambling among these young people.
To our knowledge, the only other twin study of gambling involvement is a small-scale study of 155 Minnesota-born male and female same-sex twin pairs (born between 1964-1972 , with a mean age at assessment of 26 years; Winters & Rich, 1998) . The frequency of involvement in eight different gambling activities in the past year, as well as three categorical indexes of gambling (any gambling in the past year, monthly gambling in the past year, and onset of gambling prior to age 18), and two composite indexes of gambling involvement (frequency of engaging in 'highaction' and 'non-high-action' games in the past year) were examined. Winters and Rich (1998) found that participation in 'high-action' gambling activities (scratch tabs, lottery, casino cards, and gambling machines) was significantly heritable among men, but not among women, and participation in 'non-highaction' gambling activities (cards with friends, betting on sports events or games of skill, and bingo) was not significantly heritable in either sex. (Three activities were assessed but were not included in the genetic analyses due to low base rates: betting on pull tabs, dice games, and horse/dog races.) The authors concluded from this study that there may be genetic influences contributing to individual differences only for certain types of gambling behaviors. However, inspection of the twin intraclass correlations for the composite indexes of the two types of gambling activities suggest that genetic influences may be important for both (high-action: r MZ = 0.56, r DZ = 0.25; non-highaction: r MZ = 0.57, r DZ = 0.40), and inspection of the prevalences of the activities belonging to each of the composite categories (high-action: mean prevalence = 58%; non-high-action: mean prevalence = 26%) suggests that the differences obtained may not be meaningful but could easily be attributable to differences in statistical power.
Another challenge to conducting community-based twin studies of PG, or any community-based study of PG (twin or otherwise), is that individuals with gam-
Australian Twin Study of Gambling bling problems may not be as easy to recruit into research as individuals without gambling problems. For example, in an 11-year longitudinal study of US college students, those with gambling problems were less likely to participate at later waves of the study (Slutske et al., 2003) , and in the family study of Black et al. (2006) , the family members of PG-affected probands were less likely to participate in the study than the family members of PG-unaffected controls. This may be because individuals with gambling problems are more geographically mobile than those without gambling problems, may be more likely to move or disconnect their telephone because of financial difficulties or to escape from creditors, or more likely to be incarcerated. Whatever the reason, the issue of non-participation likely affects all communitybased studies of gambling pathology. Longitudinal and family-based studies like those of Slutske et al. (2003) and Black et al. (2006) are especially well-suited for documenting and potentially assessing the impact of this phenomenon. The purpose of this article is to describe a new twin study of gambling involvement among men and women in Australia. There are three aims of this report. First, we provide a detailed description of the composition of the twin sample that was recruited for this study. Second, we present an analysis of gambling-related predictors of participation (and thus nonparticipation) in the study. Third, we present a 'first look' at sources of individual differences in gambling involvement by presenting biometrical model-fitting analyses of the propensity to engage in 11 different gambling activities and of four composite indexes of gambling involvement. In 1980 In -1982 In , a sample of 4,268 twin pairs born between 1964 In and 1971 were registered as children by their parents with the Australian Twin Registry (ATR), maintained by the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council, in response to systematic appeals through the media and the Australian school systems. This cohort has variously been referred to in publications and presentations as the ATR 'younger cohort', the '1989 cohort', or 'Cohort II'. In 1989 -1992 , when the panel was 18 to 28 years old, the first survey of the twins was conducted by mailed questionnaire (the basis for the designation of this twin sample as the '1989 cohort'). In cases where twins did not respond to the original questionnaire mailing and a follow-up mailing, an abbreviated questionnaire was administered by telephone whenever possible, which increased the overall individual response rate for the 1989 questionnaire survey to 59.3% (Heath et al., 2001) .

In 1996-2000, a telephone psychiatric interview containing a wide range of assessments including diagnostic assessments of alcohol dependence, childhood conduct disorder, and major depression (but not gambling problems or involvement) was conducted with twin pairs from the ATR Cohort II (e.g., see Hansell et al., 2008; Lynskey et al., 2002; Waldron et al., 2008) . The target sample for the interview study was all members of the ATR Cohort II dating back to the baseline sample of 1980-1982. By the time of the diagnostic interview survey, a total of 252 pairs (6%) were identified as 'lost', that is, no leads could be found after extensive efforts to retrace either twin or other family members. Telephone interviews were completed with 6,265 individuals, 2,803 men and 3,462 women, who were 30 years old on average (range = 24-36) at the time of the interview. Allowing for individuals who could not be located, who were deceased or incapacitated or otherwise unable to complete a telephone interview, or who were not assigned for interview by the end of the study, the individual response rate for the telephone interview was 84.2%. The 6,265 interviewed individuals included 2,765 complete twin pairs (in which both twins participated in the telephone interview) and an additional 735 twins from incomplete twin pairs (whose co-twin did not participate in the interview).
The 6,265 individuals from the ATR Cohort II who were interviewed by telephone in 1996-2000 and the 735 non-interviewed co-twins of those interviewed were targeted for the OZ-GAM study. After excluding 267 twins who were no longer available for study (they were deceased or no longer in the twin registry), the target sample of twins from Cohort II was 6,733 individuals. Of these 6,733 targeted individuals, 4,763 (70.7%) were interviewed for the OZ-GAM study. Reasons that interviews were not obtained were that the twin: (a) was deceased (n = 14), (b) was no longer a member of the ATR (n = 222), (c) could not be located even after extensive tracing efforts (n = 319), (d) was incapacitated or otherwise unable to conduct a telephone interview (n = 65), (e) did not have a telephone or had a silent (unlisted) telephone number (n = 48), (f) was currently overseas (n = 49), (g) was not assigned for an interview by the end of the study (n = 90), and (h) was contacted but declined the interview (n = 1,163). After excluding twins who could not be located, were deceased or otherwise unable to complete the interview, or were not assigned for an interview by the end of the study, the individual response rate for the OZ-GAM study was 80.4%. One twin was interviewed who was not in the target sample, bringing the total sample size to 4,764. There were 3,750 individual twins from 1,875 complete twin pairs and 1,014 individual twins from incomplete pairs. Figure 1 illustrates the history of the ATR Cohort II and the relation between the previous surveys and the OZ-GAM study. The average time interval between the 1996-2000 interview and the OZ-GAM interview was 7.8 years (SD = 1.4, range = 4-11). During this time interval some of the ATR Cohort II members were also recruited for and participated in a number of different studies including surveys on alcohol involvement, tobacco involvement, male pattern baldness, and childhood trauma (not shown). Figure 2 shows the sample overlap between the two previous ATR Cohort II surveys and the OZ-GAM study depicted in Figure 1 .
The twins were assessed by both structured telephone interview and mailed self-report questionnaire. The interviews were administered by a team of trained layinterviewers; different interviewers conducted the interviews of the two members of a twin pair. Interviewers were supervised by a project coordinator, a clinical psychologist with over 10 years of experience. All interview protocols were reviewed either by the project coordinator or by research editors (veteran skilled interviewers from previous studies who had maintained consistently low error rates in coding). All interviews were tape-recorded and a random sample of interview tapes was reviewed for quality control and coding inconsistencies. Midway through the course of the study the interview was adapted from a paper-and-pencil administered interview to a computer-assisted interview. The change in the format of the interview was transparent from the perspective of the respondent, and differed only from the perspective of the interviewer. Forty-eight per cent (N = 2,297) of the interviews were conducted using the computerassisted interview. The immediate availability of the interview data with the computer-assisted interview made it easy to conduct a small-scale short-term testretest reliability study (N = 166, mean test-retest interval = 3.4 months, SD = 1.4 months, range = 1.2-9.5 months) that over-sampled individuals with gambling problems.
After an initial invitation letter was sent, the twins were contacted by telephone by an interviewer who asked whether they were willing to participate in the study. Twins who agreed to participate in the study were sent a packet that included a respondent booklet to be used with the interview and a copy of the selfreport questionnaire along with a reply-paid envelope. The interview, lasting about 60 minutes, contained questions about: (1) demographics, (2) lifetime involvement in gambling activities, (3) a detailed assessment of current gambling involvement, the heaviest period of gambling involvement, and the period when gambling involvement first began, (4) lifetime and past-year symptoms of PG, (5) a screen for mania (an exclusion criterion for DSM-IV PG), (6) family history of gambling behavior and problems, (7) lifetime history of alcohol use and alcohol use disorders, (8) lifetime history of smoking (9) lifetime history of major depression, (10) history of childhood disruptive behavior disorders, and (11) history of adult antisocial personality disorder symptoms. The self-report questionnaire contained a variety of personality assessments. After extensive follow-up, 92% (N = 4,369) of the twins who participated in the interview portion of the study also returned the self-report questionnaire. The relation between the OZ-GAM study and previous surveys of Cohort II of the Australian Twin Registry.


Among the 1,875 complete twin pairs who participated in the OZ-GAM study, 867 were MZ (520 female, 347 male) and 1,008 were DZ (367 female-female, 227 male-male, and 414 female-male). Among the 1,014 individual twins from incomplete pairs there were 304 individuals from MZ pairs (151 female, 153 male) and 710 individuals from DZ pairs (181 female-female, 216 male-male, and 313 female-male). Zygosity was initially determined using self-report questions from the 1989-1992 questionnaire and the 1996-2000 interview surveys regarding physical similarity (e.g., height, eye and hair color, 'as alike as two peas in a pod') and the degree to which parents, relatives, friends, or teachers could tell the co-twins apart. If co-twins gave inconsistent answers, they were followed up by telephone, and if there was still inconsistency or uncertainty, they were asked to send in photographs from various ages, from which a zygosity assignment was made by project staff.
The zygosity assignment in the OZ-GAM study was compared to zygosity assignments derived from an analysis of DNA obtained for 241 same-sex twin pairs in the OZ-GAM who had also participated in an unrelated genome-wide linkage study. At least 200 microsatellite markers were genotyped for each individual twin, and the genetic relatedness was determined based on the proportion of genetic markers in which the allele sharing between twins conformed to the pattern expected for MZ and DZ pairs. The original zygosity diagnosis was confirmed by DNA testing for all 33 MZ twin pairs (100%), and for 202 of 208 DZ twin pairs (97%). The DNA testing indicated that 6 MZ twin pairs had originally been misclassified as DZ, which yielded an overall estimated error rate of 2.5% for zygosity assignments in the OZ-GAM study.
Demographic characteristics. Three of the demographic characteristics assessed in the OZ-GAM interview warrant explanation because they are unique to Australia -high school graduation, place of residence, and ancestry. All of these characteristics were assessed for the OZ-GAM study to potentially examine their relation to gambling behavior. In addition, ancestry was assessed in order to assemble genetically homogenous samples for future molecular genetic studies.
Because of differences in their educational systems, designation as a high school graduate may have different meanings in Australia than in the United States or other countries. In Australia, schooling is compulsory through age 15 (16 in Tasmania) compared to 16-18 in the United States (differing across states). High school usually continues through grade 10 in Australia, whereas in the United States it continues through grade 12. After grade 10, young people in Australia can choose to either: (1) complete grades 11 and 12 and matriculate from high school, (2) Venn diagram representing the sample overlap between the OZ-GAM study and two previous surveys of Cohort II of the Australian Twin Registry. Numbers represent the frequency of individual twins participating in only one survey, in two surveys, or in all three surveys.
complete grades 11 and 12, but this represents an increase over previous cohorts; about 68% of individuals who were 35-44 years old, 63% of individuals who were 45-54 years old, and 52% of individuals who were 55-64 years old in 2006 completed high school (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2008) . Based on these differences, there may be fewer high school graduates in Australia than in the United States among individuals in the age range of the OZ-GAM cohort.
Twins were asked whether their current (and also previous) place(s) of residence was a metropolitan area, regional city, or rural area. A metropolitan area (or metropolitan city) is typically defined as the urban and suburban spread surrounding the eight major capital cities in Australia -Canberra, Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, Adelaide, Hobart, and Darwin. Regional cities include all other cities in Australia.
Australia is a nation of immigrants much like the United States, but the national censuses in the two countries use different approaches for characterizing the ethnic diversity of their populations. In the United States census, one will find questions about race, whereas this is not included in the Australian census. Instead, the Australian census focuses on the heritage of the residents and where they and their parents and ancestors were born. The assessment in the OZ-GAM interview followed more closely the method used in the Australian census. Twins were not asked their 'race' but instead were asked where their parents and grandparents were born and the ancestry of their parents or grandparents, explained as 'the place or ethnic group where most of your ancestors came from.' For the ancestry questions, twins were instructed by the interviewers that the response 'Australia' was only appropriate for Indigenous individuals (likewise for the responses of 'United States,' 'Canada,' and 'New Zealand'). Gambling involvement. Eleven different gambling activities that were included in the 1999 Australian national prevalence survey (Productivity Commission, 1999) were assessed in the OZ-GAM study. Although the Australian prevalence survey only assessed gambling within the past 12 months, the OZ-GAM assessment included several different timeframes, including lifetime as well as the past year. For the purposes of this paper, we focus on any involvement in each of the 11 activities over the entire lifetime of the respondent. Two composite indexes of gambling involvement were created based on involvement in the 11 specific gambling activities: any gambling and gambling versatility. Any gambling was a dichotomous indicator of whether the participant had ever engaged in any of the 11 different gambling activities at any time. Gambling versatility was a continuous indicator of the number of different activities in which the respondent had ever been engaged, which reflects the extensiveness or diversity of the respondent's gambling involvement. The internal consistency reliability (Cronbach's alpha) of the gambling versatility index was 0.68. Also included in this report are two other indicators related to the overall frequency and 'quantity' of gambling involvement: the number of days within a 12 month period in which gambling occurred during the respondent's heaviest period of gambling, and the most that the respondent ever spent on gambling in a single day. The largest amount of money ever spent on gambling in a single day was defined for participants as net expenditure, that is 'the total amount that you started out with at the beginning of the day minus the total amount that you ended up with at the end of the day. So this would be the single day in which you lost the most money overall.' Two different measures of gambling-related problems were included in the OZ-GAM study, the NODS (NORC DSM-IV Screen for Gambling Problems; Gerstein et al., 1999) that was developed for a national United States gambling prevalence survey conducted in 1999, the Gambling Impact and Behavior Study (Gerstein et al., 1999) , and the South Oaks Gambling Screen (SOGS; Lesieur & Blume, 1987) that was originally developed to assess problems among individuals seeking treatment. The NODS assessment more closely matches the current diagnostic criteria used for diagnosing PG, whereas the SOGS has been the instrument used in the majority of PG epidemiologic research worldwide, including a 1999 Australian national prevalence survey (Productivity Commission, 1999) . For both the NODS and SOGS, both lifetime and past-year problems were assessed. For the purposes of this paper, we focus on lifetime diagnoses of PG, as well as symptom counts based on the NODS and SOGS lifetime assessments. Both sets of PG measures were very reliable. The test-retest reliabilities for the lifetime diagnoses of PG from the NODS and the SOGS were 0.67 and 0.78, respectively, using the kappa coefficient, and were 0.79 and 0.82 using Yule's Y, and 0.92 and 0.95 using the tetrachoric correlation, based on data obtained from the 166 individuals in the retest sample. The internal consistency reliabilities (Cronbach's alpha) of the NODS and SOGS lifetime symptom counts were 0.85 and 0.81, respectively.
Assessments from the 1996-2000 interview were used to predict participation in the OZ-GAM study. Although gambling behaviors were not assessed in the 1996-2000 interview, other gambling-relevant features were, such as demographic characteristics (age, sex, income, high school graduation, and religion), other addictive behaviors (alcohol use, smoking), and comorbid disorders (alcohol dependence, major depression, conduct disorder). We also examined other characteristics (e.g., zygosity) that have been associated with participation in previous ATR surveys. Demographic characteristics. The demographic predictors are all self-explanatory except for the measure of income. Twins reported their overall yearly combined gross household income by choosing from a list of 11 income ranges, presented in three formats corresponding to amounts per week, fortnightly, or annually. Individuals were categorized as being 'high income' and 'low income' based on whether they were in about the upper 25% and the lower 25% of the income distribution on this 11-point scale. The median yearly household incomes of the high and low income groups corresponded to greater than AUD $62,500 and less than AUD$30,000, respectively, in 1996-2000. History of substance use and psychiatric disorder. 'Regular drinker' was defined as ever drinking at least once a month for at least 6 months. 'Regular smoker' was defined as ever smoking cigarettes daily or nearly daily for a period of at least three weeks. Lifetime diagnoses of alcohol dependence, major depression and childhood conduct disorder were made according to the DSM-IV criteria, except that clustering of symptoms of alcohol dependence and of conduct disorder within a 12 month period were not required.
Predictors of participation in the OZ-GAM study. Longitudinal twin studies offer at least two clues for detecting sampling bias. First, one can use assessments obtained at previous study waves to predict participation at later waves. Second, one can examine differences between twins whose co-twin did not participate in the interview with those whose co-twin participated in the interview. The rationale here is not unlike that underlying the interpretation of the participation rates of the family members of the probands and controls in the family study of Black et al. (2006) . Rather than starting with individuals with and without PG and checking to see how many of their relatives participated in the study, we are starting with individuals whose relatives (co-twin) did and did not participate in the study and checking to see how many of the probands and controls (twins) had PG. If twins with PG were systematically under-sampled, then higher rates of PG would be expected among twins whose co-twin did not participate in the interview than among twins concordant for participation in the interview (assuming that PG, like nearly all traits, is correlated in twin pairs). Following from this logic, one would also infer that twin pairs in which neither twin participated in the study would also have higher rates of PG, perhaps even higher than the pairs in which one twin participated. We cross-sectionally examined within the OZ-GAM study whether there were systematic differences in gambling behaviors between twins from pairs that were concordant versus discordant for participation.
For both sets of analyses, procedures for analyzing survey data were used to adjust for the nonindependence of the observations obtained from two members of a twin pair. Essentially, the data were treated as clustered, with the family unit (in this case, the twin pair) serving as the cluster.
Sources of individual differences in gambling involvement. As a 'first look' at the sources of individual differences in gambling involvement, we conducted biometrical model-fitting analyses of the 11 different gambling activities and the four composite indexes of gambling involvement. Models were fit by the method of maximum likelihood directly to the raw twin data using the Mx program (Neale et al., 2003) . The data from incomplete as well as complete twin pairs were included in the analyses. This method reduces potential biases in parameter estimates due to nonparticipation if the data are missing at random (Little & Rubin, 1987) . Although it has become standard practice in twin analysis to fit a series of nested submodels in order to drop nonsignificant parameters, the focus of these analyses of gambling involvement was on the estimated parameters and 95% confidence intervals around parameters from a full model allowing for additive genetic, shared environmental or nonadditive genetic, and nonshared environmental factors as sources of variation. This is the most effective way of communicating the results of univariate analyses of twin data, because estimates from reduced models can be easily misunderstood (a genetic parameter may be significant or an environmental parameter may be nonsignificant, but with extremely broad confidence intervals).
The sources of individual differences in whether or not a twin had ever participated in 11 different gambling activities, as well as any of the 11 activities, were examined. These were treated as categorical variables in the analyses, which assumed that the underlying liability, or propensity, to engage in a particular gambling activity or in any gambling activity is normally distributed. We also examined the sources of individual differences for three different continuous indicators of gambling involvement. All three of these measures were rank-normalized with a Blom transformation in an effort to reduce their positive skew.
For this 'first look' we did not examine whether there were sex differences in the estimates of the genetic and environmental variance components. Threshold or mean differences between men and women were included in all of the analyses, however, to take into account sex differences in the prevalences or mean levels for the different gambling behaviors.

The twins in the OZ-GAM study represent a relatively broad cross-section of the Australian general population of 32-43 year olds (see Table 3 ). Similar to most community-based twin cohorts, the OZ-GAM sample tends to be relatively socio-economically advantaged. However, the sample also includes individuals without post-secondary education (38.0%), who are unemployed (2.3%), and who are on public assistance (5.7%). The twins come from all walks of life, including truck driver, construction worker, mechanic, farmer, waitress, police officer, garbage collector, plumber, hairdresser, secretary, teacher, nurse, lawyer, and doctor. Included in Table 3 is the religion in which the twins were raised; they also reported their current religion, which showed only moderate agreement with their childhood religion (kappa = 0.55). Most of the lack of agreement was due to the fact that over onequarter of the OZ-GAM sample went from being Christian as children to having no religion as adults. Eighty-six per cent and 13% of the twins reported that they were raised Christian, or with no religion, respectively (see Table 3 ), compared to 61% and 38% who were currently Christian or no religion, respectively (not shown). Table 4 shows the current state or territory of residence for the OZ-GAM sample along with the rank of the states or territories in their average per capita expenditure on gambling. What is especially noteworthy is that 47% of the twins live in the two states in Australia (Victoria and New South Wales) with the highest average per capita expenditure on gambling and 14% of the twins live in the state with the lowest average per capita expenditure on gambling (Western Australia). For the 63.2% of individuals who reported that they lived in a metropolitan area (see Table 3 ), the current state or territory of residence also provides information about the particular metropolitan area in which they are living. For example, of the 912 twins who are living in New South Wales, 558 indicated that they live in a metropolitan area. Therefore, we know from these two pieces of information that about 12% of the OZ-GAM sample is currently living in the Sydney metropolitan area.
The ancestry of the participants is presented in Table 5 . As expected from the original settlement of Australia, most of the twins are of Northern European ancestry, especially from the United Kingdom and Ireland. There are also a sizable number of twins with Southern, Western, Eastern European and Asian ancestry, and also a small minority with some indigenous Australian (Aboriginal) ancestry.
Nearly all of the predictors from the 1996-2000 interview (with the exception of age, being raised Anglican or with no religion, and having a history of major depression) significantly predicted participation in the OZ-GAM study. Twins who participated in the OZ-GAM study were more likely to: be female, from MZ and same-sex twin pairs, have a higher household income and be a high school graduate, and less likely to: have been raised Catholic, be a regular drinker or smoker, and have a history of alcohol dependence or Note: a one participant was 30 years old and one was 31 years old; 99% of participants were 32-42 years of age.

conduct disorder. After adjusting for the main effect of sex, having a higher household income and being a regular drinker were no longer statistically significant predictors, and having a history of major depression became a statistically significant predictor of participation in the OZ-GAM study. Odds ratios of the unadjusted associations between each predictor and OZ-GAM participation are presented in Table 6 . Also presented in Table 6 are the characteristics of the targeted sample and the final OZ-GAM sample to illustrate the net effect of this differential attrition. Note that the statistical tests were not based on comparing these two groups (because the OZ-GAM is a subset of the target sample) but is based on a comparison of the participating (in OZ-GAM) and nonparticipating twins from the target sample. Inspection of Table 6 shows that the OZ-GAM sample was fairly close to the target sample on all of the demographic, other addictive behavior, and psychiatric characteristics examined. A comparison of twins from pairs concordant (i.e. complete pairs) and discordant (i.e., incomplete pairs) for participating in the OZ-GAM study is presented in Table 7 pairs), and for categorical indicators, odds ratios are presented as an index of the strength of the association between the type of twin (from complete versus incomplete pairs) and the gambling-related outcome. Twins from pairs that were discordant for participation in the study reported a larger maximum number of dollars ever spent gambling in a day, had more symptoms of DSM-IV PG, and were more likely to have a lifetime diagnosis of PG by both the DSM-IV and SOGS definitions. For example, the prevalences of DSM-IV and SOGS PG diagnoses were about 50% higher among the twins from incomplete pairs than among the twins from complete pairs. Overall, the lifetime prevalences of DSM-IV and SOGS PG diagnoses in the full OZ-GAM sample were 2.2% and 3.5%, respectively.
The lifetime prevalence, test-retest reliability, twin correlations, and results of biometric model-fitting for 11 different gambling activities are presented in Table 8 . Table 8 Note: a analyses were based on 6,136 of the 6,733 individuals in the target sample who participated in the 1996-2000 interview; b analyses were based on 4,542 of the 4,764 individuals in the OZ-GAM sample who participated in the 1996-2000 interview. family environmental, and nonshared environmental influences were generally moderate, low, and moderate, respectively, with mean parameter estimates obtained of A = 0.43, C = 0.10, E = 0.46. There were only a few deviations from this general pattern. In particular, Internet casino gambling was of very low prevalence, the test-retest reliability of self-reports of ever participating were somewhat lower than for the other activities, and probably due to its very low prevalence, the estimates of A and C were not significantly different from zero (although the estimates of A and C were nonsignificant, the estimates of the combined familial influences was statistically significant; A + C = 0.64 [95% CI = 0.16, 0.91]). Also, betting on games of skill (such as billiards) appeared to be less heritable than the other forms of gambling (again, although the estimates of A and C were nonsignificant, the estimates of the combined familial influences was statistically significant; A + C = 0.39 [95% CI = 0.24, 0.55]). Any lifetime gambling involvement bore striking similarities to any alcohol involvement. Both were extremely common in this Australian sample, were very reliably measured, and were strongly familial (MZ twin correlations of 0.79 and 0.77). For any gambling, the combined familial influences of A + C was statistically significant (A + C = 0.76 [0.58, 0.88]). For any alcohol use, the broad-sense heritability (A + D) was estimated rather than A and D individually because additive and nonadditive genetic effects are not well parsed in the classic twin study (Martin et al., 1978; Williams, 1993) . This combined influence of additive and nonadditive genetic influences was 0.75 (95% CI = 0.57, 0.87).
The indicators of any gambling involvement and any alcohol use can also be interpreted as reversed indicators of lifetime abstinence from gambling and from drinking alcohol. Any lifetime gambling involvement was based on endorsing at least one of the 11 different gambling activities; because there are so many different ways one can gamble, it is possible that a twin's gambling experiences may not have been captured by this list. Therefore, participants were also asked to report any other gambling activities that were not included in the list. Five per cent of the twins (N = 242) reported another gambling activity; the three most commonly reported additional activities were 'two-up' (a traditional Australian coin-flipping game), betting on snail, mouse, rat, cockroach, rabbit, fly, and yabby (crawfish) races, or betting on the outcome of events. All of the twins who reported an additional activity also endorsed at least one of the 11 standard activities, and so the list appears to have provided adequate coverage of any gambling involvement. For both gambling and alcohol, abstinence was rare -2% of these Australian twins were lifetime abstainers. Abstention from both gambling and alcohol were strongly familial; it was not possible to discern the extent to which the familial factors contributing to individual differences in abstention from gambling were genetic or environmental.
The mean, test-retest reliability, twin correlations, and results of biometric model-fitting for versatility, frequency, and quantity of gambling involvement are presented in Table 9 . On average, these Australian twins
Wendy S. Slutske, Madeline H. Meier, Gu Zhu, Dixie J. Statham, Alex Blaszczynski, and Nicholas G. Martin 75 (0.57, 0.87) 0.25 (0.13, 0.43) had participated in 5 of the 11 different gambling activities listed in Table 8 in their lifetime, during their heaviest period of gambling they gambled about once a week, and on the single day that they spent the most on gambling, they lost AUD$149. The sources of individual differences for versatility, frequency, and quantity of gambling involvement were similar to the sources of individual differences in the liability or propensity to participate in the individual gambling activities in Table 8 there was evidence for moderate genetic effects and very modest to no shared family environmental effects.
In this article, we describe a new twin study of gambling involvement conducted in Australia. The rationale for conducting a twin study of gambling in this particular setting is that Australia has higher rates of gambling involvement and problems than anywhere else in the world (with the possible exception of Taiwan; Hwu et al., 1989) , or at least than in the United States. Below we discuss the extent to which the recruitment of a heavy-gambling twin sample was accomplished, comment on the composition of the OZ-GAM sample, and then summarize the findings regarding potential sampling biases and our 'first look' at the sources of individual differences in gambling involvement.
In the United States National Epidemiologic Survey of Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC; National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism; Grant et al., 2004; Petry et al., 2005) , a national survey of 43,093 adults conducted in 2001-2002, the lifetime prevalence of DSM-IV PG was 0.43% in the full sample and 0.41% when the sample was restricted to 32-43 year olds (the same age range as the OZ-GAM). In the United States Gambling Impact and Behavior Study (GIBS; NORC Gambling Impact and Behavior Study; Gerstein et al., 1999) , a survey of 2,417 adults conducted in 1998-1999 that used the interview on which the OZ-GAM DSM-IV PG assessment was based, the lifetime prevalence of DSM-IV PG was 0.80% in the full sample and 0.50% when the sample was restricted to 30-39 year olds (only age ranges were available in the public domain dataset in order to protect confidentiality). In comparison, the lifetime prevalence of DSM-IV PG in the OZ-GAM was 2.2%, that is, more than 500% and 400% higher than same-aged individuals from the United States NESARC and GIBS surveys. (It is worth noting that in addition to being the first community-based twin study of gambling involvement conducted in Australia, the OZ-GAM also may be the first community-based epidemiologic survey of lifetime DSM-IV PG conducted in Australia -previous community-based surveys have focused on past-year problems, or were typically based on the SOGS assessment.) Another perspective is the relative efficiency of conducting community-based PG research in Australia versus the United States. In the Australia OZ-GAM, 4,764 participants were screened in order to identify 104 individuals with DSM-IV PG, whereas in the United States NESARC, 43,093 participants needed to be screened in order to identify 185 individuals with DSM-PG. Nonetheless, even in a heavy-gambling culture in Australia where PG is more common than in the rest of the world, it is still a relatively rare disorder.
The lifetime prevalences of ever participating in different forms of gambling were generally high, with the exception of internet casino gambling. Internet gambling has come under a great deal of scrutiny over the last decade, in Australia and in the United States, because of concerns that it will potentially make gambling opportunities more easily available to an even larger segment of the population, and thus lead to increased rates of gambling problems. Australia was the first country to legalize online gambling, and was also one of the first countries to quickly respond to the potential harms associated with online gambling. With the passing of the Interactive Gambling (Moratorium) Act in 2000, it has become illegal for any gambling service provider, in Australia or overseas, to provide services to individuals in Australia. Online casinos in Australia that were in operation prior to the moratorium have been allowed to remain available for Australia customers (but perhaps not surprisingly, the largest proportion of their customers is from the United States and other countries).
In a 1999 Australian national survey, 0.41% of adults reported that they had played Internet casino games in the past year, similar to 0.55% of twins from the OZ-GAM surveyed in [2004] [2005] [2006] [2007] (not shown in Table 8 Note: a controlling for the main effects of sex; MZ = monozygotic; DZ = dizygotic; A = additive genetic influences, C = shared family environmental influences, E = nonshared environmental influences. Kessler et al., 2008) . Either Internet gambling has not become as popular in Australia as anticipated, or the measures taken to control it have been effective. The OZ-GAM sample is broadly representative of Australian individuals 32 to 43 years of age. However, it must be recognized that the sample was originally assembled in 1980-82 (see Figure 1) , and so might not match current Australian national demographic characteristics. As would be expected from any community-based longitudinal study, the OZ-GAM sample probably reflects the demographics from the period when the cohort was originally recruited. Longitudinal twin data provide several checks on sampling biases that are not possible with cross-sectional surveys of unrelated individuals. In a previous paper, Heath et al. (2001) examined the predictors (actually, 'postdictors') of participation in the 1989 questionnaire survey from later participation in the 1996-2000 interview in the ATR Cohort II (see Figure  1 ). The target sample for both surveys was the entire ATR Cohort II, but a much higher response rate was achieved with the 1996-2000 interview, and so the question was the extent to which the smaller questionnaire sample was biased. The postdictors that were identified by Heath et al. (2001) of participation in the questionnaire were very similar to the predictors of participation in the OZ-GAM interview -being female, from an MZ twin pair, obtaining a higher educational attainment, and not being Catholic, a smoker, or having a history of alcohol dependence or conduct disorder.
Comparisons of twin pairs concordant and discordant for participation in the OZ-GAM also suggested that individuals who spent more money on their gambling and who had lifetime symptoms of DSM-IV PG and PG disorder were less likely to participate. The prevalence of DSM-IV PG was 2.2 in the OZ-GAM sample overall, but it was 3.4% among those twins whose co-twin did not participate in the study. Although this seems like a big difference, it does not have much of a net effect. For example, if one assumes that the prevalence of DSM-IV PG was 3.4% among all of the 1969 twins from the target sample of 6,733 individual twins who did not participate in the OZ-GAM (for all reasons), this would have yielded an estimated prevalence of 2.5% in the full target sample. If one assumes that the prevalence of DSM-IV PG in twins who did not participate was double that estimated in the OZ-GAM, that is 4.4%, the estimated prevalence in the full target sample would have been 2.8%.
The propensity to gamble was strongly familial, but because gambling was so common, it was not possible to determine the extent to which the familial influences for any lifetime gambling was due to shared genes or shared environments. Although a different conclusion was reached, the Minnesota twin study of Winters and Rich (1998) obtained similar results. Winters and Rich reported twin concordances of any gambling in the past year of 86% for MZ twins and 81% for DZ twins, which did not significantly differ, and that led them to conclude that there were not widespread genetic influences on all gambling behavior, but only for 'high-risk' gambling involvement. However, the MZ and DZ concordances were also not substantially different from the reported prevalence of 88% of any gambling in the past year among singletons obtained from a state of Minnesota survey, suggesting that the high base rate of the behavior made it difficult to disentangle the causes of individual differences. Extremely common binary traits such as any gambling can be as difficult to study as extremely uncommon binary traits such as PG disorder.
When the focus was narrowed to the propensity to participate in a particular gambling activity, the results were more straightforward. For 9 of the 11 activities assessed, the propensity to ever participate was primarily due to genetic and individual-specific environmental factors. For none of the activities was there statistically significant evidence for shared family environmental influences, although the confidence intervals were generally broad and could not rule out the possibility of shared family environmental influences accounting for as much as 30% of the variation in liability for most forms of gambling. A comparison of the results obtained for the 11 different gambling activities suggests that there were more similarities than differences, but when the 'high-action' and 'non-high-action' groupings of Winters and Rich (1998) are examined, a pattern similar to the findings of the previous study emerges. Four activities that were 'high-action' -lottery, electronic gaming machines, instant scratch tickets, and casino table games -had an average heritability of 54%. The four activities that were 'non-high-action' -bingo, card games, betting on a sporting event, and betting on games of skill -had an average heritability of 32%. Winters and Rich (1998) describe 'high-action' games, as those that tend to be associated with heavy player promotion and potentially high-payoffs, and 'non-high-action' games, as those which tend to reflect lower payoffs and informal involvement, such as social betting. Although the difference between high-action and non-high-action gambling was not rigorously tested, it looks to be a promising distinction that may potentially identify more and less heritable gambling activities.
It is also intriguing to consider the extent to which the differences between the results of the NMSQT twin study (which was conducted in the early 1960s in the United States -a gambling prohibitive milieu) and the OZ-GAM (conducted in the early 2000s in Australia -a permissive gambling milieu) may be an example of a genotype × environment interaction. In other words, perhaps the genes that influence the propensity to gamble are more likely to be expressed in a more gambling permissive environment. An alternative explanation for the differences between the results of the NMSQT and OZ-GAM studies may rest with the ages of the samples. The NMSQT participants were high school seniors still living at home with their parents, whereas the OZ-GAM participants were adults, most with children of their own. Perhaps the effect of the family environment on the propensity to gamble may be relatively transient and limited to the developmental period when young people are currently living with their family of origin.
Other indicators of gambling involvement showed a similar pattern of genetic and environmental influence. The number of different gambling activities an individual ever tried in their lifetime (versatility) was partially due to genetic differences, as was the frequency (number of days gambled) and quantity (amount spent) of gambling in any form of gambling. Again, there was limited evidence for an important influence of the shared family environment. These results cast doubt on theories that look to social modeling influences to explain the familial transmission of gambling.
Although an important initial step, this 'first look' at the sources of individual differences in gambling involvement in some ways raises more questions than it answers. Not presented in this report was an examination of differences in the causes of variation in men versus women. We also focused on a few crude indices of gambling involvement, and primarily reported on what is typically termed 'initiation' in the substance use literature -that is, whether one has ever used, or participated in a given gambling activity. We did not look at more fine-grained approaches to characterizing an individual's level of involvement, or the extent to which genetic and environmental influences might play somewhat different roles in the different stages or levels of involvement (i.e., initiation, regular involvement, frequent involvement, problematic involvement). We have documented genetic influences on the propensity to engage in 9 different forms of gambling, but it is extremely unlikely that there are 9 different sets of genes involved. Future research (including analyses of our own data) may be able to identify groupings of activities that have similar underpinnings, that is, common susceptibility genes, or identify a general propensity to gamble, with the same genes involved in the propensity to engage in all the different forms of gambling. Given the high rates of involvement in many different gambling activities in Australia, the OZ-GAM sample would appear to be ideal for answering such questions.
I. Introduction T he use of ultrasound microbubble contrast agents has expanded beyond their primary role in diagnostics and into the research fields of drug and gene therapy [1]- [4] . originally approved for use in echocardiography, microbubble contrast agents are encapsulated gaseous microspheres that improve the quality of ultrasound images as a result of the difference in acoustic impedance between their gaseous core and the surrounding medium (blood) and because of their nonlinear oscillation in an acoustic field [1]- [5] . The shells of the microbubbles are composed of materials such as proteins, polymers, or lipids, whereas the gas core is typically a high-molecular-weight gas such as a perfluorocarbon or sulfur hexafluoride [6] . Microbubbles have been utilized for imaging myocardial perfusion [7] , [8] ; left ventricular opacification [9] , [10] ; blood perfusion in tumors [11] , [12] , livers [13] , and kidneys [14] ; and for molecular targeting of angiogenesis [15] , [16] or inflammation [17] , [18] .
Ultrasound is widely used in clinical settings because it is safe, inexpensive, and portable. additionally, ultrasound has the ability to focus deep within tissue, which is useful for therapeutic applications. Ultrasound, without the aid of microbubbles, is well established to have therapeutic uses in the areas of hyperthermia [19] , [20] , tissue ablation [21] , [22] , lithotripsy [23] , [24] , and thrombolysis [25] [26] [27] . When microbubbles are combined with ultrasound for therapy, the applications extend into the fields of drug and gene delivery [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] , and particularly chemotherapy [1] , [33] .
The development of a drug or gene delivery method that could target a tumor or organ with high specificity and improve therapeutic efficacy, while reducing side effects, is of particular interest to many areas of medicine [34] , [35] . The combination of ultrasound technology and nanoparticle drug capabilities has developed into a promising method for achieving targeted drug delivery. In this review, we discuss the underlying mechanisms of nanoparticle delivery with ultrasound and microbubbles, and assess various proposed delivery techniques. additionally, we examine the types of nanoparticles currently being investigated in preclinical studies, as well as the general limitations and benefits of a microbubble-based approach to nanoparticle delivery.
The use of nanoparticles in drug and gene delivery is rapidly gaining popularity. although strictly defined by the national cancer Institute as any particle with at least one dimension under 100 nm, in this review the term nanoparticle will be used to define any sub-micrometer vehicle, often capable of carrying a therapeutic payload. nanoparticles vary in shape and size, along with physical and therapeutic properties. some common types of nanoparticles are micelles, liposomes, dendrimers, solid nanoparticles, emulsions, and microemulsions, which are detailed extensively in [34] , [36] , and [37] . nanoparticles are often exploited as delivery vehicles by encapsulating a therapeutic compound that may otherwise cause systemic toxicity if delivered in free form. Many nanoparticle delivery vehicles show promise for carrying high therapeutic payloads, controllable release rates, and targeting abilities-both passive and active [38] . simply by altering surface properties, various aspects of the in vivo performance can be modified [39] .
In cancer therapy, the small size of nanoparticles is particularly advantageous within tumor vasculature. solid tumors incite blood vessels with larger diameters and increased permeability [40] . In many tumors, the vessels are leaky, with inter-endothelial gaps of an average of 380 to 780 nm, but with some larger than 1 µm, depending on tumor type and location [41] . Furthermore, high pressure and low lymphatic drainage in tumors decreases the clearance of high-molecular weight-nanoparticles from the tumor interstitium [42] . These abnormal properties combine to form the enhanced permeability and retention (EPr) [43] , [44] . Because typical nanoparticle sizes prevent extravasation from normal vasculature, they are passively targeted to tumor tissue.
although the subject is beyond the scope of this review, ultrasound alone has been shown to improve nanoparticle delivery through thermal or mechanical processes. Ultrasonic heating can cause direct effects on the tissue itself by changing blood flow and vascular pressure, or can activate an agent such as a thermally sensitive nanoparticle or nanodroplet [20] , [45] . The use of ultrasound and nanoparticles has also gained interest in the field of dentistry. High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) has been shown to aid in delivery of antibacterial agents into dentinal tubules by inducing cavitation [46] , [47] .
In the field of therapeutic ultrasound with microbubbles, the most commonly used types of nanoparticles are quantum dots [48] , liposomes [49] [50] [51] [52] , and poly(lactic-coglycolic acid) (PlGa) nanoparticles [53] , [54] . quantum dots are often used in studies in place of nanoparticle drugs to characterize delivery vehicles and evaluate successful delivery into targeted tissue. doxorubicin-containing liposomes have been used extensively in ultrasound and microbubble delivery studies (see Table I ). one reason for their popularity in research studies is that several forms, known as doxil or caelyx, daunoXome, and Myocet, are already Fda approved for clinical use. doxorubicin is also inherently fluorescent, which makes optical tracking of delivery feasible. another form of liposome used with microbubble ultrasound delivery is the lipoplex, which is a liposome containing genetic material such as plasmid dna [55] [56] [57] . This method protects the dna during in vivo circulation and allows a greater amount of genetic material to be delivered [55] , [56] .
Ultrasound exposure in the presence of microbubbles can increase both cellular and vascular permeability, leading to enhanced nanoparticle delivery. an increase in cell permeability ensues from the formation of pores in the cell membrane during a process called sonoporation. at higher pressures, ultrasound alone can cause the formation of pores within the cell membrane [58] . This effect is enhanced with the addition of microbubbles. although the exact mechanisms are not fully understood, the oscillation of microbubbles in an ultrasound field creates transient pores in the lipid bilayer [59] [60] [61] . The degree of sonoporation is dependent on the cavitation behavior of the microbubbles, which is in turn dependent on the acoustic conditions applied. Both stable and inertial cavitation have been shown to result in pore formation [1], [28] . during stable cavitation, the microbubble oscillates without disruption, whereas during inertial cavitation, the microbubble is unstable and fragments [1]. streaming of fluid around the bubble can occur in both cases and causes shearing of the cellular membrane [62] , [63] . When microbubbles near cellular membranes are exposed to high-energy pulses, they often form microjets during collapse, resulting in high shear stresses from streaming and shockwaves that are thought to lead to pore formation [64] , [65] . In addition to creating openings in cells, the cavitation response of microbubbles may also facilitate uptake by forcing the nanoparticles into the cell through microjets [66] .
Pore formation can be either transient (reversible) or permanent. Transient pore formation has been observed in vitro, wherein pores remained open for seconds to hours. In some instances, pore openings have been reported up to 24 h after ultrasound exposure [67] . Permanent pore formation is undesirable in most applications, because it leads to cell death. consequently, care must be taken in selecting appropriate acoustic conditions because cell death can occur with sufficiently high or long ultrasound exposure [62] , [63] , [68] . For example, deng et al. observed an increased transmembrane current in cells subjected to both ultrasound and the presence of microbubbles indicating increased membrane porosity [69] . cells recovered to resting levels in about 4 to 10 s following insonation for approximately 1 s at 1 MHz and 1 MPa pressure, but higher ultrasound intensities (>1 MPa) for durations longer than 0.5 s resulted in irreversible cell damage and cell death. In general, reagent delivery increases with increasing acoustic pressure, but so too does the likelihood of cell apoptosis [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] .
Many groups are also investigating cellular changes that occur as a result of ultrasound exposure, including In shell PaEc PVsMc changes in calcium levels, cell signaling pathways, and endocytosis [60] , [73] . In a study on gene delivery to BlM melanoma cells, lentacker et al. found that lipoplexes were directly entering the cell cytoplasm through sonoporation rather than endocytosis [56] . The uptake was seen to occur during or immediately after ultrasound exposure. Meijering et al. also observed small molecules (4.4 and 70 kda) entering the cell membrane via pores, however they found that larger molecules (155 and 400 kda) were entering into the cell through vesicle formation in endocytosis [60] . The role of calcium in sonoporation has been investigated and calcium is believed to aid in cell recovery after pore formation [74] . other cellular changes that have been observed are hyperpolarization of the cell membrane, release of free radicals, and increased levels of hydrogen peroxide [74] , [75] . yang et al. recorded differences in cell viability and permeability depending on the stage of cell growth, indicating the cell cycle may play a role in cell permeability [74] . With respect to vessel permeability, effects can range from mild reversible permeability enhancement to gross vessel rupture, depending on the microbubble and acoustic parameters [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] . results from many groups have suggested that large molecules (such as dextrans), as well as nanoparticles, enter into the interstitial space after sonication with microbubbles [81] [82] [83] [84] . This vascular permeability is expected to be a result of the interaction between microbubbles and vessel walls. caskey et al. studied the effects of insonated microbubbles within ex vivo vessels and observed both asymmetric collapse and jet formation near the vessel wall [85] . chen et al. also studied microbubbles within ex vivo vessels and observed that jet formation occurs away from the vessel wall [86] [87] [88] .
acoustic radiation force also enhances nanoparticle delivery. radiation force, or the Bjerknes force, refers to the directional forces experienced by objects in an ultrasound field. Because of the transfer of momentum from the sound wave to the bubble, bubbles are translated in the direction of the acoustic wave propagation [89] , [90] . To achieve translation, radiation force pulse sequences require a high duty cycle which is low in amplitude so as to not rupture the microbubbles. radiation force applied perpendicularly to vessel orientation can result in microbubbles being pushed to the vessel walls, where they can accumulate [91] . This phenomena has been shown to aid in delivery of nanoparticles when microbubbles are used [49] , [93] [94] [95] . When nanoparticles are attached to the microbubble, the local concentration of nanoparticles can be increased by pushing the microbubbles against the vessel wall in one location [91] , [92] , [96] .
There are two main administration methods employed for nanoparticle delivery with ultrasound and microbubbles: unbound and bound nanoparticles. In the first method, the nanoparticles are not associated with the microbubbles, but are either injected separately or co-administered. If separate injections are performed, the order of injection may vary as long as microbubbles are present when ultrasound is applied. lin et al. showed no significant difference in tumor accumulation between quantum dot injection before or after insonation as long as microbubbles were present during the ultrasound [97] .
The second method of delivery requires the nanoparticles to be attached to the microbubble before injection and ultrasound treatment. There are numerous ways to associate the nanoparticle with the microbubble. one of the most common methods to attach a nanoparticle to the microbubble is the use of biotin-avidin interactions. Biotinylated microbubbles are used to attach either avidin or streptavidin nanoparticles, or in some cases an avidin linker is used to link biotinylated particles [49] , [52] . although biotin-avidin linkage is suitable for proof of concept studies, it is not ideal for in vivo use because it can induce an immunogenic response [49] , [98] . an alternative to this method is to use maleimide-thiol chemistry. Maleimide conjugation is often used in molecular imaging studies to create targeted microbubbles and can also be applied to nanoparticle attachment to the shell of the microbubble [51] . another covalent binding possibility was illustrated by Burke et al., in which PlGa nanoparticles were coupled to albumin microbubbles through carbodiimide chemistry [53] . oligonucleotides have also been employed as tethers to link vesicles to microbubbles through hybridization of complementary lipid-linked dna oligonucleotides [99] .
Electrostatic binding of nanoparticles to microbubbles is often implemented in gene delivery studies, wherein negatively charged dna is attached to positively charged microbubbles with shells composed of a cationic lipid. Electrostatic interactions can also be exploited to create nanoparticle-bound microbubbles. one example of this was described by seo et al. who created positively charged monodisperse microbubbles through microfluidics and attached negatively charged silica-coated nanoparticles [100] . This technique was shown to be effective for various sizes and shapes of nanoparticles.
drugs can also be directly incorporated into the shell of the microbubble, although this provides a challenge in the inherently limited payload capacity. drug-loaded polymer-shelled microbubbles, whose thicker shells allow for higher drug loading, fragment into nanoshards, which are less than 400 nm in size [101] [102] [103] . These shards are small enough to extravasate from the vasculature of the tumor.
There are some definite advantages to linking the nanoparticle to the microbubbles. along with being able to track the nanoparticle in circulation by ultrasound imaging of the microbubble carriers, attaching the nanoparticle ensures that they are present at the target site during insonation. Using ultrasound to rupture the microbubble at a desired location leads to targeted deposition of particles. as discussed previously, linking the nanoparticle to the microbubble also allows for radiation force to be used
of nanoparticles in vitro using radiation force in combination with microbubble-loaded nanoparticle constructs compared with without using radiation force [49] , [93] . linking nanoparticles to microbubbles is also advantageous because it prevents dilution of the nanoparticle solution when it enters the bloodstream [53] . Finally, microbubbles loaded with certain nanoparticles may serve as multi-modality contrast agents for platforms such as dual MrI-ultrasound and optical-ultrasound [104] [105] [106] , although further discussion of these methods is beyond the scope of this review.
There are also some challenges related to associating the nanoparticle to the shell. When linking through a process such as biotin and avidin, multiple washing steps are necessary to remove free linking agent. This can be both time consuming and detrimental to the fragile bubble preparation, requiring a higher initial concentration of microbubbles. Furthermore, excess nanoparticles are typically required to maximize loading. Finally, attaching the nanoparticle to the microbubble may alter the in vivo circulation time and biodistribution. This is discussed further in the last section of our review.
There are a variety of ultrasound systems in use to accomplish microbubble-aided nanoparticle delivery. Many researchers use single-element transducers powered by arbitrary waveform generators and amplifiers, whereas others use commercial therapy systems or even clinical imaging systems (Table I ). In [107] , seip et al. describe ideal qualities of a therapy system, including the ability to both image and treat a desired location to monitor delivery and release of the agent. The system should be able to generate intensities and pulse sequences needed for microbubble delivery, deliver focused energy deep within tissue to target a specific area, treat in an acceptable amount of time, be incorporated into current treatment workflow, and be easy to use and set up. Most therapeutic treatments involve ultrasound with a center frequency of around 1 MHz, which is much lower than clinical imaging systems typically provide. although some custom systems have been created, dual imaging and treatment often requires multiple transducers to be used in conjunction with one another [108] . nanoparticle delivery has been performed with both focused and unfocused transducers, as well as at varying pressures-up to 7 MPa (Table I) .
VII. successful nanoparticle delivery studies some of the first nanoparticle delivery studies were performed in vivo with fluorescent nano/microspheres (100 to 500 nm) delivered to rat skeletal muscle [81] , [109] . In these studies, vessel rupture caused by microbubble breaking was observed and the particles were delivered into the intersitium of the muscle. Extravasation points were observed where particles and red blood cells leaked out of the vasculature (Fig. 1) . Findings also illustrated the importance of allowing microbubbles to replenish in between ultrasound pulses and quick (10 s) injection of particles to increase deposition. delivery of fluorescent nanospheres (30 to 120 nm) to cardiac muscle was later shown by Vancraeynest et al. [82] .
Feasible in vivo nanoparticle drug delivery with microbubbles and ultrasound was demonstrated using PlGa nanoparticles loaded with fibroblast growth factor-2 [110] . Initial studies depicted 40-fold and 670-fold increases in nanoparticle delivery to the mouse adductor muscle when ultrasound or ultrasound and microbubbles were applied compared with nanoparticles alone. subsequently, drug- loaded nanoparticles were delivered into the ischemic hind limb of the mouse with the addition of ultrasound and microbubbles. results of the studies showed an increase in total number of large and moderate diameter arterioles, as well as marked luminal expansion of pre-existing collateral arteries and transverse arterioles. although the growth factor did not induce angiogenesis in gracilis muscles, arteriogenic remodeling was seen along with an increase in arteriole-line intersections (Fig. 2) .
successful nanoparticle gene delivery was demonstrated in vitro with plasmid dna (pdna), short interfering rna (sirna) and messenger rna (mrna), often involving a fluorescently tagged gene so that transfection can be easily quantified [55] [56] [57] , [111] , [112] . Encapsulating the genetic material within a liposome, creating a lipoplex, or siPlex, protects the genetic material and allows more to be delivered to the target site. Ultrasound-mediated delivery with microbubbles was found to overcome the limitations of PEGylated liposomes. although PEG increases circulation of the lipo/siPlexes, it hinders cellular uptake. When cells in an opticell were exposed to ultrasound, liposomes loaded with up to 15 mol% PEG had limited gene expression/inhibition with free liposomes, but exposure to loaded microbubbles and ultrasound led to statistically significant differences (Figs. 3 and 4) . These studies also demonstrated the direct entry of liposomes into the cytoplasm when ultrasound and microbubbles are present [56] . Uptake and expression were investigated further with mrna lipoplexes loaded onto microbubbles [57] . Uptake was observed in 50% of the cells when loaded microbubbles and ultrasound were applied, compared with 0% uptake with lipoplexes alone, and 24% of the cells illustrated successful transfection. These results support the hypothesis that not all of the contents are released from liposomes upon insonation.
liposomal-loaded microbubbles have also proven to be advantageous for drug delivery. as mentioned in an earlier section, doxil, and other doxorubicin-containing liposomes are commonly used in ultrasound and microbubble delivery studies. When doxorubicin-containing liposomes were bound to microbubbles and delivered to melanoma cells in an opticell, significantly higher cytotoxicity was seen (Fig. 5) [113] . additional findings indicated that enhanced delivery was caused by both release of doxorubicin from liposomes and sonoporation caused by the microbubbles. The released free doxorubicin enters into the cell more efficiently than the liposome-contained doxorubicin. studies carried out with self-assembling liposome-loaded microbubbles revealed a lower dose of doxorubicin could be used when the liposomes were bound compared with free liposomes [51] .
recently, enhanced in vivo delivery of liposomal doxorubicin has also been observed. after several studies with lipid-coated quantum dots delivered in mice, studies were carried out with doxil and microbubbles with ultrasound exposure [114] . The concentration of doxil in tumor tissue over time, the impact on tumor size on various treatments, and dose were investigated. Using focused ultrasound, more doxil was delivered when microbubbles were administered, and colorectal adenocarcinoma tumor growth in mice was hindered (Fig. 6) . at 24 h after treatment, more drug was concentrated within the tumor compared with treatments of doxil alone, however, the concentrations of both treatments were similar by 48 h. It was also observed that smaller tumors responded better to treatment than larger tumors at 5 mg/kg. larger tumors required a higher treatment dose of 10 mg/kg. Tumor histology revealed extravasation of fluorescent doxil (Fig. 7) .
delivery of doxorubicin-containing nanoshards has also been carried out in vivo. Polymer microbubbles containing doxorubicin in the shell were destroyed within VX2 tumor-bearing rabbits, which created nanoshards capable of extravasating into tumor tissues. Initial studies revealed significantly higher concentration of doxorubicin within the periphery of the tumor following ultrasound treatment compared with no insonation [102] . In later work, significant differences in tumor growth were also observed between mice treated with drug-loaded microbubbles and ultrasound compared with free drug at 14 d (Fig. 8) [115] . Paclitaxel-loaded polymer microbubbles are also being developed which can hold up to 20 times as much drug as doxorubicin-loaded microbubbles [101] . nanoparticle drug delivery has also recently been applied to fields outside of chemotherapy [116] . Microbubbles loaded with rapamycin-coated magnetic ion nanoparticles are being investigated as a treatment option for ischemic coronary heart disease. Using magnetic stents, the nanoparticle-loaded microbubbles are targeted to the desired location, and then the drug is released when the microbubbles are ruptured using ultrasound. In vitro studies have shown cell growth inhibition with rapamycin-loaded nanoparticles, whereas testing of the magnetic stents confirms microbubble accumulation at the stent. Increasing the flow conditions lead to an increase in nanoparticle deposition.
There are still many obstacles to overcome to translate microbubble-mediated ultrasound delivery of nanoparticles into a clinical setting, but progress is being made as more in vitro and in vivo studies are being performed. Work remains to be done on understanding the mechanisms taking place in vivo to ensure that safe delivery can be achieved. Bioeffects will need to be closely monitored, because tissue damage has been seen in some studies [82] . It will also be important to understand the biodistribution and pharmacokinetics of the nanoparticles when delivered with microbubbles. as discussed in [52] , liposome nanoparticles generally have long circulation times, but when bound to microbubbles, the complex is limited to the 5-to 10-min circulation time of the microbubble. although the microbubble-mediated delivery method will increase the nanoparticle concentration at the target site, accumulation in other organs is always a major factor to consider, because drug or gene accumulation in nontargeted organs/tissues could be detrimental. For example, unlike with liposomes, a high concentration of lipid from circulating microbubbles is taken up by the spleen. nanoparticles bound to the microbubble may, therefore, also end up in the spleen.
another area that is actively under investigation is the effect of ultrasound on the integrity of the nanoparticle, and how bound nanoparticles disassociate from microbubbles. There have been conflicting reports about how and if the nanoparticle is released from the shell. lum et al. detected lipid labeled with diI on the nanoparticles after breaking the microbubble [93] . However, other groups have found that the nanoparticle breaks free [49] , [55] , [112] . Ultrasound exposure has also been shown in some cases to cause release of the contents [52] , [113] , whereas in other studies, the cargo remains intact within the liposome carriers [111] , [112] .
loading optimization also needs to be addressed. liposome loading on microbubbles has been estimated at between 600 and 10000 liposomes per microbubble, depending on the size of both the microbubble and the liposome [49] , [51] , [52] . This may be complicated further by the fact that lipids are not uniformly distributed through the shell layer of microbubble, resulting in heterogeneous loading of nanoparticles [93] , [117] . Uniform loading is desirable to accurately quantify the amount of drug or gene on each bubble, and therefore delivered to the target site. optimization of loading is challenging because it is frequently difficult to determine concentrations of nanoparticle solutions because of their small size. although binding can be confirmed through methods such as flow cytometry, UV spectrometry, and microscopy, exact numbers of bound nanoparticles are difficult to obtain.
Further optimization of both ultrasound settings and delivery vehicle design are also needed. Because a variety of systems exist which deliver ultrasound energy, there is also a wide range of settings in use. currently, com- parisons between studies are hard to make because of the highly variable acoustic parameters used from study to study. In addition to ultrasound systems and settings, different microbubble formulations and nanoparticles are used that influence the results of each study. Further refining of microbubble populations through size selection techniques may be a way to improve the effectiveness of delivery methods. Microbubble populations with high uniformity in size may allow optimal loading of particles onto the shell and better prediction of the microbubbles' response to ultrasound [118] , [120] . additionally, further study of the tradeoffs between bound and free nanoparticle delivery is needed for each application.
despite the challenges being faced in the field of nanoparticle delivery, many advances are being made in the use of ultrasound and microbubbles and the approach is developing into a promising method to improve treatments in cancer and genetic disorders. 
Ultraviolet (UV) therapy has been used for decades in the treatment of skin diseases, mainly psoriasis, vitiligo, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, and eczema [1, 2] . The effectiveness of artificial UV light in different skin therapies is well documented [3, 4] . UV therapy cabins are used in dermatology worldwide. Various fluorescent emitting tubes, e.g. narrowband UVB (311 nm) -TL01, broadband UVB -TL12, and broadband UVA -TL09 (for psoralen UVA therapy), could be arranged in a round assembly to provide strong UV radiation exceeding the maximum of the solar irradiance that reaches the Earth's surface.
Determination of the irradiance at the patient's skin surface requires the use of calibrated radiometers [5] . The radiometers contain filters to select the waveband corresponding to that of the cabin UV tubes and have specific spectral sensitivity varying significantly between sensors made even by the same manufacturing company. Thus, a comparison of the radiometer reading with irradiance measurements from a calibrated spectroradiometer and measurements of the radiometer spectral sensitivity are necessary to convert output of the radiometer (in volts) to the irradiance scale (mW · cm -2 ) [5] . Martin et al. [6] reported variations of 50% in the cabinet irradiance measurements made by different radiometers having the same calibration procedure with a high resolution spectrophotometer. The differences were caused by specific angular properties of the radiometer detector, and radiometers with good angular responses should have been recommended for the cabinet measurements [7] . Curie et al. [8] proposed an automated dosimetry system for testing whole-body ultraviolet phototherapy in dermatological cabins and demonstrated variations in the irradiance measured inside the cabin. The system has not been put into operational use probably because of its calibration procedure that requires regular comparisons of the system UV detectors with a high resolution spectroradiometer during simultaneous measurements in a dermatological cabin.
Accurate estimation of the UV dose received by a patient during phototherapy remains a problem. One possible method is to measure the cabin UV intensity at different body points performed by a UV-protected operator using a personal handheld dosimeter calibrated for the spectrum of the tubes used [9] . The measured doses are then averaged and this mean value represents the cabin irradiance, which is then multiplied by a patient's exposure duration to estimate the UV radiation dose received during the phototherapy treatment. This method is characterized by a large uncertainty and the calibrations differ markedly between specialist centers. For example, TL-01 calibration in the UK varies by at least a factor of 2.7 [10] . There were clinics, however, which either did not have reliable hand-held dosimeters or did not trust their output, and in order to obtain an estimation of patient dosage they performed measurements using a radiometer built in a cabin and computer software evaluating the dosage from this radiometer data or delivered the patient a dosage based on exposure time only [4] . Such methodology was also routinely implemented in two examined cabins in Poland, one located in Poznan (later in the text referred to as Poznan phototherapy cabin, PPC) and another in Lodz (LPC). The dose received by a patient was based on output of the built-in dosimeter in PPC, while in LPC it was based on the exposure time. It is of special importance to control and quantify the patient's radiation dose to ensure both the safety and the effectiveness of the cabin therapy.
In this paper we propose a cabin calibration system (CCS) to improve the current dosimetry methods used in Poland and to aid the patient treatments in order to maximize therapeutic efficiency. The proposed system is based on the Curie et al. [8] calibration concept of using two UV sensitive instruments rotating inside the cabinet to determine the doses received by a patient during the medical treatment and to identify malfunctioning tubes. In our solution, different instruments of the system are used and we propose a novel calibration procedure of radiometers measuring the UV irradiance by fluorescent tubes. Details of the UV distribution in the cabin and the tube aging process are also discussed with a view to extending our knowledge of the long-term performance of the cabin.

Two types of medical cabins were examined: MEDISUN 2800 PC-AB in Lodz, and MEDISUN-2800-44-PC-AB in Poznan. The whole body phototherapy was performed in those cabins using narrow band UVB (TL-01) and broadband UVA (TL-09 UV-A) fluorescent tubes (Philips Lighting B.V., Roosendall, the Netherlands). The irradiance spectra of the tubes, measured inside the cabin by a USB2000+ spectrophotometer (Ocean Optics Inc., Dunedin, Florida, USA), are shown in Figure 1 . There are 12 TL-01 and 16 TL-09, and 16 TL-01 and 32 TL-09 tubes mounted in a round assembly in LPC and PPC, respectively, as presented in Figure 2 .
In Lodz the UV dose (J · cm -2 ) received by a patient during the phototherapy treatment is estimated using a joulemeter. The duration of the cabin irradiation of a patient compliant with the UV dose prescribed by a medical doctor is set by nursing staff. Thus, a constant intensity of the tube radiation is assumed and the received UV dose is proportional to the duration of the cabin treatment.
The duration of the irradiation in the Poznan cabin is determined according to the prescribed individual patient dose and the measured irradiation by the built-in cabin radiometer. In such a way a loss of the tube power due to the aging processes, which may happen after prolonged use of the tubes, may be compensated by a longer duration of the phototherapy.
We examined the performance of the tubes using the CCS, which consists of a commercial meter, YES UVA-1 ultraviolet pyranometers (Yankee Environmental System Inc., Turner Fall, MA, USA), with a wide field of view (almost hemispherical) to estimate the irradiation (in mW · cm -2 ) on the surface, and two prototype meters, developed by the Tele & Radio Research Institute, Warsaw, containing Schottky diodes with a narrow viewing angle (~40°) to identify small-scale spatial variability in UV radiation field in the cabin. One of the narrow viewing angle (NVA) meters contains a GaN/ AIGaN diode which is sensitive to UVB radiation from TL-01 tubes. The other one, with a GaN/ AIGaN p-i-n diode that measures mostly UVA radiation, was designed to monitor TL-09 tubes. Below we use the acronyms NVA-UVB and NVA-UVA, respectively, to denote the two meters.
The UV monitoring instruments were mounted on a remote control rotating device, which allows one to quantify UV irradiance coming from different sectors of the cabin. The automated system provides a reproducible technique for cabin monitoring and reveals more detailed information on the UV irradiance distribution within the cabin. The details of the CCS calibration procedure are included in the supplementary information section for this article.
The measurements of the UV irradiation in the center of the cabin were carried out by the CCS mounted on a vertical bar ( Figure 3 ) that could rotate due to the motorized system. The CCS measured the UV changes inside the cabin during 360° rotation at 3 selected vertical levels corresponding to the height of a human face, chest, and stomach. The measurements of the UV intensity by the CCS consisted of the following stages: 1) fixed position (in front of one of the cabin walls) for about 60 s, The procedure, referred to below as Mode A of the cabin examination, was used to estimate the UV variability inside the cabin. The measuring sensor was placed at the distance of 15 cm from the rotating axe (Figure 3 ), as the irradiated parts of the patient's body are usually outside the geometric centre of the cabin. The effects of the patient's presence in the cabin on the UV level were examined using a manikin. The manikin absorbs part of the radiation and reduces the multiple reflectance between the cabin walls. There are two options: one with an undressed and another with a dressed manikin ( Figure 4 ). During the experiment, the CCS was fixed as in stage 1, and the manikin stood just behind the measuring unit. The fixed position of the CCS in front of the cabin wall is referred to as Mode B of the cabin examination.
The CCS is designed to compare the UV doses with nominal doses previously assigned by nursing staff. The selected nominal doses were 1.4 J · cm -2 and 5 J · cm -2 for TL-01 and TL-09 tubes in LPC, respectively. In PPC only TL-01 tubes were examined, and a 2.0 J · cm -2 dose was selected for the calibrations because the broad band UVA phototherapy by TL-09 tubes is rarely prescribed to a patient. The selected nominal doses correspond to those used in medical practice [11, 12] . , the UV irradiance increased only slightly during warming of the tubes. In Poznan, the measurements in PPC started with a jump after which the cabin software adjusts the UV intensity to lower values, and a few seconds later a slight upward tendency in the tube irradiation appears. The irradiance fluctuated in stages 2 and 4 because the radiometer measured the UV radiation coming from different sectors of the cabin walls. The UV level in the Poznan cabin was higher because PPC contains more tubes, 16, in comparison with LPC, 12. The range of UV fluctuations, which was measured as the difference between the maximum and the minimum irradiance recorded during the CCS rotations, was ~1 mW · cm -2 in LPC, being twice as large as that in PPC. In stages 3 and 5 the irradiance level was almost constant. The calibration procedure (Mode A) of the cabin status lasted about 11 min. The irradiance level at the end of the procedure was only slightly lower than that at the start. Figure 5 B shows the irradiance variability in stages 2 and 4, i.e., only during the CCS rotation, measured by the NVA-UVB meter in LPC and PPC. In this case the UV radiance incident upon the instrument sensor comes from a small area of the cabin, as the viewing angle of the instrument is about 40°. The variability of UV radiation was much higher compared to that obtained by YES UVA-1. In certain positions (cabinet corners), the NVA-UVB meter registered only UV radiation reflected from the cabinet walls outside the influence of direct lamp radiation. The irradiance field in the cabin was smoother in PPC because more tubes were used. During the clockwise rotation of the CCS in LPC (step 4 of Mode A) the irradiance was only slightly lower than that during anticlockwise rotation (step 2 of Mode A). This was probably due to lower efficiency of the tube at higher temperature and/or due to the temperature sensitivity of semiconductors used in NVA meters. The computer software controls the tube efficiency in PPC taking into account irradiation measured by the built-in UV meter. Thus, sometimes the irradiance during the clockwise turning is slightly higher than that during the anticlockwise turning.

The examination of the cabin with NVA meters allowed the performance of individual tubes to be monitored and indicated a loss of their power due to aging of the tubes. Thus, it seems also possible to identify the malfunctioning tubes. YES UVA-1 is more appropriate to determine the irradiation of a patient body, as it is sensitive to radiance coming from a wide hemispherical area of the cabin that corresponds to the field-of-view of the patient's skin during the phototherapy. Table I shows the ratio between nominal doses that a patient should receive during phototherapy in LPC and the actual dose measured at different levels corresponding to the height of the stomach, chest, and face of a patient 175 cm tall. The results are for two data sets extracted from Mode A measurements:
• full series of measurements comprising all stages (1-5) of Mode A, A B
• part of a full series including only measurements in periods with CCS rotations (stage 2 and 4 of Mode A). Doses produced by the narrow band UVB (TL-01) and the broad band UVA (TL-09) tubes were compared in three sessions in 2010 (April 10, June 19, and November 23).
The nominal and observed doses were in good agreement. The ratio (nominal dose divided by the CCS measured dose) was within the range 0.82-1.15 at the level of the stomach and chest (Tables I and II) , i.e., for a significant part of the patient's body. The nominal doses assigned in the broad band UVA therapy were only slightly larger than those measured by the CCS, whereas the nominal doses were slightly smaller than the measured ones for the narrow band UVB tubes.
The ratio between the nominal and measured doses in LPC usually decreased when comparing the ratio for doses measured only during the rotating phase of measurements (stage 2 and stage 4) with the ratio obtained for the whole Mode A (Table I). More irradiation was received by the CCS in a fixed position. During the rotations, lower irradiation was recorded from the corner zones of the cabin (45°, 135°, 225°, and 315°, see Figure 2) . The difference between the ratios for the rotating phase and the whole Mode A is smaller for the broad band UVA lamp, because TL-09 tubes were spread more evenly in the cabin. The measured UV doses decreased with the height, especially between the chest and face level, and the change was about 10%.
The same pattern of the UV variability inside the cabin was found for PPC in the tests carried out in April 2010, but the ratio between the nominal and measured doses was about 10% lower (Table II) than that measured during the examination of LPC. The measured doses were closer to the nominal ones, especially at the stomach level, if the CCS was fixed in front of 45°-0°-315° cabin wall as it is in Figure 2 .
After approx. 500 h of the narrow band UVB phototherapy and approx. 65 h of the broad band UVA phototherapy in LPC, there were small changes in the tube efficiency (within 10% accuracy of the irradiance measurements). Figures 6 and 7 show the time series of the measured irradiance in April, June, and November calibration sessions, for the narrow band UVB and broad band UVA tubes, respectively. shows the irradiance changes during the clockwise rotation between 360° and 180° ( Figure 2 for the selected cabin sector) by the NVA-UVB (Figure 6 A, around 0°-20°, and Figure 6 B, around 315°-360°) with larger irradiance than was measured in previous intercomparisons. It was explained to us by the nursing staff that two malfunctioning tubes, which were mounted at 45°-0°-315° wall, had been replaced with new ones. Signs of tube malfunctioning, i.e., light flickering, had been noticed earlier on (before the November comparison) by a patient.
Assessment of the cabin performance requires the irradiance measurements with and without a person in the cabinet to establish a correction factor accounting for the presence of the body, which itself absorbs UV radiation [5] . The body correction factor varies between 0.80 and 0.96, and it depends on the cabinet design and patient posture [13, 14] . Table III shows the comparison between the nominal and measured dose results with a fixed position of the CCS (Mode B) for an empty cabin, an undressed manikin, and a dressed manikin inside the cabin at two heights corresponding to the stomach level (Figure 4 -top) and the chest level (Figure 4 -bottom) . The attenuation of the UV dose with the undressed and dressed manikin was more apparent for the UV irradiation by the (chest) for the broad band UVA compared to 11% (stomach) and 14% (chest) for the narrow band UVB. The attenuation of the cabin irradiation by the dressed manikin (and the undressed manikin for the broadband UV tubes) was statistically significant, since the uncertainty of the UV irradiance measurements by the CCS was around 10%. The manikin (such as normally used in clothes shops) simulates a rather thin patient, whereas the dressed manikin imitates the presence of a stockier patient in the cabin. The attenuation range found by the CCS in LPC corresponds to the correction factor obtained in earlier studies [14] . Table III shows that the nominal doses set by the nursing staff were about 20% higher than the ones measured by the CCS for Mode B of LPC testing. The agreement between the doses is better when the cabin is occupied by the manikin. The agreement will be even better for a normal patient. Thus, at the moment we do not recommend using the body correction factor for nominal doses set by nursing staff for the UV exposures in the Lodz cabinet.
The automated system for testing phototherapy cabinets proposed by Curie et al. [8] was used in parallel with manual measurements by a Macam 203 meter to evaluate its performance. Both the automated system and the hand-held UV radiometer were calibrated in the cabin during simultaneous measurements with a high-resolution spectrophotometer. Thus, almost a perfect agreement between doses by the automated system and the radiometer was not surprising. Polish cabinets are not equipped with hand-held personal radiometers, so testing of the cabinet performance could be done comparing the measured UV doses by the proposed system with nominal doses assigned by nursing staff according to medical doctor prescriptions. It is worth mentioning that some authors questioned the effectiveness of the hand-held radiometers for the cabin calibration [6, 10] .
The CCS is based on the Curie et al. [8] calibration concept of using wide-angle and narrow-angle view sensors rotating inside the cabinet, but different instruments are implemented. The basic instrument of our system, a commercial broadband radiometer routinely used at meteorological stations for UVA monitoring, YES UVA-1, with an almost hemispherical field of view and a small cosine error, is a temperature-stabilized meter (at 45°C). Thus it allows precise measurement of UV radiation in an environment with large temperature variability. The temperature in the centre of the cabin may increase from room temperature at the start to about 40°C after ~10 min' operation. The uncertainty of the cabin UV irradiance measurements by CCS was estimated as ~10%, which is mostly due to the error of estimation of YES UVA-1 instrumental constants (~6%) to convert its output in volts to solar irradiance in mW · m -2 (for more details see supplementary information).
The calibration of our system is done by field comparisons with a routinely operated spectrophotometer (the Brewer spectrophotometer at Central Geophysical Observatory of the Institute of Geophysics, Belsk, Poland) used for continuous measurements of solar UV spectra. Our calibration methodology does not require a set of simultaneous measurements, separately for each lamp category (e.g. narrow band UVB, broadband UVB, broadband UVA), by the system and a high resolution spectrophotometer in a cabinet. The proposed method will have universal applications as it allows one to calibrate any radiometer (with a broad sensitivity band in the UV range) for any kind of UV tube radiation, with known spectral characteristics of its radiation output.
The CCS monitored the performance of phototherapy cabins in Lodz (MEDISUN 2800 PC-AB) and Poznań (MEDISUN-2800-44-PC-AB). The nominal doses (J · cm -2 ) to be received by a patient during the whole body phototherapy, as prescribed by medical doctors, were set differently in the two cabins. In Lodz, the duration of exposure in the cabin was assigned taking into account the value of the prescribed phototherapy dose under the assumption of constant power of the tubes. In Poznan, the appropriate irradiance level and the duration of the phototherapy were adjusted by computer software combined with the builtin meter. Thus, the UV intensity in the cabinet varied throughout phototherapy and the tube aging effect could be compensated by a higher tube voltage. It was found that the UV doses assigned by the nursing staff agreed within ±20% with the doses measured by the CCS. The UV irradiance at the stomach and chest level was slightly (~10%) higher than that measured at the face level. Some parts of the human body therefore could receive significantly different irradiation even at the same level because of the angular changes of UV irradiance inside the cabin. This effect was stronger in Lodz, as the maximum irradiance (in front of the cabin wall) was about 1.0 mW · cm -2 greater than the minimum irradiance (from the corners of the cabin), whereas the difference between the extremes in Poznan was two times lower due to the more evenly distributed UV field owing to more tubes per cabin wall. Thus, for some patients, slow turning around in the cabin during the phototherapy could be a good practice. The examined cabins performed quite well and no corrections of the dosage incident upon a patient were necessary within 5 months of the cabin operation.
